Ponniyin Selvan Part 4

The Crown

Author:

Kalki

Rendered In English By:

Varalotti Rengasamy


Chapter 1 - On The Banks of River Kedilam

Many rivers ran through the country of Thirumunaippadi and made it fertile.
River Kedilam was one of them. Lord Shiva who won over the heart of one of
the greatest Nayanmars, Thirunavukkarasar was in Thiruvadikai Veerattanam
which was on the banks of River Kedilam. The Lord who won over another
great Nayanmar Sundaramurthy resided in Thirunavalur which was very close to
the river. Between these two holy places ran the highway that connected the
Thondai Mandalam, the Chozha Kingdom and the Central Provinces. The place
where the highway crossed River Kedilam would be buzzing with activity
throughout the day all round the year. The passengers would stop there for rest.
The bullocks would be unyoked from the carts. People would have their food in
that place. When they ate they would playfully throw cooked rice in the air
which would be eagerly picked up by the hungry crows. Children seeing this
sight would applaud and make strange sounds with their mouths - aahoo...aahoo.

It was the beginning of the Tamil month of Aippasi which corresponded to
October-November of English calendar. There was more water in the river than
usual. The travellers who had stopped there for lunch were excited. The
excitement resulted in a loud conversation. The whole place was noisy. And then
came a noise which subdued all other sounds. The travellers were startled by the
sudden noise. Some of them climbed up the bank to check the source of the
sound. At first they could see only a screen of dust. Then they saw the Royal
paraphernalia. There were elephants, horses, palanquins and standard bearers.
When the retinue came near them they could hear the sound of the person
heralding the royal dignitary.

“Hail the greatest of warriors who entered the battle-field at the age of twelve,
the Kopparakeasari who beheaded Veerapandiyan, the lion feared by those in the
Twin Provinces even in their dreams, the Head of the Northern Armed Forces,
the first born of Emperor Sundara Chozhan who reigns over the three worlds, the
one and only Adithya Karikala Chozhan!”

When the booming voice of the herald echoed in all the directions all the people
on the banks of River Kedilam ran up to meet the Crown Prince. They stood on
either sides of the road leaving a clear way of passage for the royal retinue.

Heralds, the trumpet blowers and the standard bearers reached the river first.
Three horses came in the rear. The horses carried young warriors. Even when
they were at a distance people started pointing at them to identify them.

“The one who comes in the middle is Adithya Karikalan. You should know by
the golden crown that adorns his head. See how the crown shines in the rays of
the sun.”

“You are praising this crown! You should see him wearing the grand crown of
Karikal Valavan. They say that it will shine like a million suns.”

“Thambi that’s not the crown of Karikal Valavan. It is so described more to
honour a tradition. The truth is that our emperor Sundara Chozhan is wearing the
crown which was made during the times of Emperor Paranthaka. Nobody knows
how long he will wear that crown.”

“Looks like everyone is worried about the life of Sundara Chozhan for quite
some time. I have an intuition that he will live long.”

“May your words come true. Let him live long. So long as he lives there won’t
be any chaos in the Kingdom.”

“Well, I don’t buy that stuff, brother. Since the news of Ponniyin Selvan’s death
the whole Chozha country is in a state of turmoil. A war may break out at any
time. So say the people coming from the Chozha country.”

“Who’s going to fight with whom? What for?”

“They say that a war might break out between the Pazhuvettaraiyars and the
Kodumbalur Chieftain. The Chieftains are assembling at the Kadambur
Sambuvarayar Palace to prevent that war. Our Crown Prince too is going there.”

“The horses have come near. Don’t be so loud. It’ll land us in trouble.” - warned
another guy. He also added:

“See the grief in the face of the Crown Prince.”

“How can it be otherwise? His brother is dearer to him than his own life. And if
there’s no news about such a dear brother how can he be happy? See his plight.
His father is in death bed. His brother’s fate is not known.”

“That’s not the reason for his grief. He wants to invade the Twin Provinces. He is
frustrated because that could not happen.”

“Why? Who prevented him from waging a war against those Provinces?”

“Who else but the Pazhuvettaraiyars? They refuse to give him the weapons and
supplies necessary for a war of such magnitude.”

“Everyone has his own reason. No one knows the real reason behind the Prince’s
grief.”

“Oh, here comes the great Mr. Know-all. We give up. You tell us the real
reason.”

“Adithya Karikalan fell in love with a girl from the Pandya Kingdom. When the
Prince went for the North Pennai War the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar forcibly
married that girl. And that girl is now the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. And she
has unleashed a reign of terror in Chozha Kingdom. The Crown Prince has lost
his mind after all these developments.”

“May be. May be. Who knows? You know our elders have said that all the wars
in the world are caused by a woman.”

“Which elders told you that? That’s nonsense. If a Prince had fallen in love with
a girl do you think that the girl would marry a sixty year old man? People may
say a thousand things. Shouldn’t we use our brains?”

“Ok, agreed. Now you tell me why Adithya Karikalan is not yet married?”

“Shut up. They have come near. The one who comes to the right of the Prince is
Parthibendra Pallavan. Who’s in the left? Isn’t that Vallavaraiyan Vandhiya

Thevan of the Vaana clan?”

“No. That’s Kandhanmaran, son of Kadambur Sambuvarayar. Sambuvarayar
knew very well that if he sent a message the Crown Prince may not come. So he
sent his own son as the messenger.”

“Which means the matter is very, very important.”

“The matter could be political. Or concerning the marriage of the Crown Prince.
The Chieftains would be casting their net for the Prince - to marry off their
daughters to him. The girl who marries him first would be the Queen of the
Chozha Empire.”

The spectators at the banks of River Kedilam were talking so many things. The
three horses stood near the bank. The chariot stood a little away under the shade
of the pupil tree. The sole occupant of the chariot was the eighty-year old
warrior Thirukkovilur Malayaman, the Emperor’s father-in-law and Karikalan’s
grandfather.

Adithya Karikalan turned back to look at his grandfather without getting off his
horse.

Chapter 2 - The Grandfather And The Grandson

The old man in the chariot signalled to Adithya Karikalan. The Crown Prince
turned his horse and went towards the chariot.

“Karikala, my child! It is time to take leave of you. I am going back to
Thirukkovalur. I want to share something important with you before I go. Get
down from the horse and come to that platform below the pupil tree over there.”

“As you please, Thaatha.”

The grandfather and the grandson dismounted and walked towards the platform.

Parthibendran spoke to Kandhanmaran.

“Thank God the old man decided to leave us. I was afraid that he might cling on
to us till we reach our destination.”

“If only he did I had decided to push him into Vellaru and drown him.”

The young men laughed together.

Malainadu Udaiyar, also known as Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman, started a long
narration:

“Adithya, you were born twenty four years ago. You were born in my palace at
Thirukkovalur. Oh My God! I can’t forget the celebration to mark your birth. It
appears as if they happened only yesterday. People from your clan, my clan and
all the Chieftains of the Chozha and Thondai Mandalam Kingdoms had come.
Thirty thousand soldiers had come along with those Kings. I hosted a feast for
all of them. I don’t have words to describe the grandeur of the feast. It was
grander than even the coronation ceremony of your father. What my ancestors
had accumulated in the treasury for a hundred years, I spent in the three-daycelebration to mark your birth.

“Your great grandfather Emperor Paranthaka visited Thirukkovalur on the
occasion. Your grandfather’s brother Kandaraathithar and your father Sundara
Chozhan had come. When they learnt that a boy had been born, their joy knew
no bounds. They were happy that you came into this world to continue the line
of Chozha clan unbroken. Your grandfather’s elder brothers did not have sons till
then. Your father was the only son to your grandfather Arinjaya Chozhan.

Your father at your age was as handsome as the Love-God. Nobody had seen
such a handsome man either in the Chozha clan or in any other clans of
Tamilnadu. Of course your father had some troubles on account of his good
looks. He was the most favoured child in the family. The women in the palace
would dress him up as a woman. ‘If only he were a woman!’ they used to tell
often. When he came of age all the kings from Srilanka to Vindyas were ready to
offer their daughters to him. Not only was your father as handsome as Arjuna
and the Love-God, he was the heir apparent of the Chozha throne. So there was a
fierce competition amongst the Kings to have your father as their son-in-law. I
was the lucky one to have that unique honour.

“We, Malaiyamans, whether men or women, are not known for our looks. We

were a race who always thought that a man’s beauty is directly proportional to
the number of war-wounds on his body. For our women, beauty only meant
character and morality. When it was decided that your father should marry my
daughter, my Kingdom erupted into such a grand celebration that the Chieftains
of Tamilnadu were burning in jealousy over our good fortune. I could not care
less. Your parents got married in Thanjavur. The whole world was amazed by the
way the wedding was celebrated. The only event that was celebrated in a grander
manner than your parents’ wedding was your birth. The happy discussion and
debate we had to decide on your name still lingers in my memory. Some said
that you should be named after your illustrious ancestor Karikal Valavan. I and a
few others insisted that you should be named after your grandfather’s brother,
Rajadithya. Finally we arrived at a compromise by having the best of both the
worlds - you were named Adithya Karikalan.

“Look over there, Adithya! You can see Thirunavalur’s temple tower. That was
the place where Nambi Aarooran was born. Twenty five years ago your
grandfather’s brother Rajadithya Chozhan camped there. I have heard many
stories of warriors. I have seen many of them in Tamilnadu, a country known for
its valour. But I have not seen anybody as valiant as Rajadithya Chozhan.
Whosoever watched him fighting on that day would agree with me.

He camped here to gather a large army and invade the provinces in the North. He
had vowed to defeat the King of the Twin Provinces, Kannara Devan and raze
his capital Maniyakedam to ground. You know, once in the past the Pallava
Emperor destroyed the capital of Vathaapi. Rajadithyar wanted to do the same to
Maniyakedam to teach a lesson to the Twin Provinces. And if he did that he too
will become popular like Mamallan, the great Pallava King who conquered the
Pulikesis. Do you think it’s an easy task to gather army for such an ambitious
war? It is said that the Pallava King Mamallan spent seven years to gather an
army to invade Vaathapi. Rajadithya said that he did not need such a long time
and that he would have the army ready in three or four years. He chose the area
between River Kedilam and River Thenpannai as the best place to recruit the
army and train them in warfare.

Adithya, you are not fortunate enough to witness the scene that unfolded in a
place between the two rivers. And those who saw it could not forget it for the
rest of their lives. Rajadithya stayed in Thirunavalur along with thirty thousand
soldiers. A chieftain from the Chera Kingdom by name Vellan Kumaran was
camping on the banks of Pennai River along with twenty thousand soldiers. Your
grandfather Arinjaya Chozhan was with me in Thirukkovalur. Arinjayan and I
recruited and trained fifty thousand soldiers for the war. Along with us were the
Senior Velar of Kodumbalur, the Pazhuvettaraiyar - who has now become the
curse of Chozha Kingdom, Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar - the chieftain of this
place, Thirumunaippadi, Munaiyatharaiyan, Mazhavaraiyar of Mazhanadu, the
Kundrathur Kizhar and Vaithumbarayan, along with their vast armies. Huge
battalions of cavalry, armies of elephants and the three great infantry regiments
of Kaikolas also camped along with us.

We had a lot of mock battles amongst ourselves for training. When elephants
crashed against elephants the sound and the shock would resemble that of an
earth quake. When the soldiers wielding shining spears rode on the horses the
resultant sound would resemble the roar of the oceans during an apocalypse.
When the soldiers shot a barrage of arrows in the air the skies would be covered
by a screen of arrows. When the infantry marched ahead shouting battle cries it
would appear that the end of the world was near. Scores of civilians would come
there to witness the feats.

The people of this Thirumunaippadi country and the Middle Provinces are very
good. They are known for their valour. While the army was stationed here, their
agricultural activities were affected. But they did not mind. As a measure of
expressing his gratitude to these people Rajadithya ordered his people to dig a
lot of lakes in these countries. He brought the Coleroon River up to Veera
Narayanapuram and filled the lake with the water from the river. The one person
who derived the maximum benefit from that project was Kadambur
Sambuvaraiyar. In those days he used to be very humble and subservient before
Rajadithya. When I see his pride and vanity today I am greatly surprised.”

Adithya Karikalan intervened.

“Thatha, why should you worry about Sambuvaraiyar’s pride? You tell me about
the war at Thakkolam. How did the vast army gathered at the banks of river
Kedilam leave this place? Why did our army face defeat in spite of the vast
arrangements and meticulous planning? Rajadithya was one of the greatest
warriors of our times. And he was heading such a mighty army. How did the
enemy manage to defeat them at Thakkolam? I know, Thatha, you also took part
in the war. You must have seen what happened at the great battle field.”

“Yes, my child. I was there. I was about to describe the scene.”

“Rajadithya gathered a vast army here. He also went to distant places to train the
soldiers. Due to some reason which I do not remember now he could not leave
the place as planned. Meanwhile we got the news that there was a war in
Srilanka. A part of the army had to go there. When there was a strong enemy in
the South the Chozha Emperor did not want the Chozha Generals and the
soldiers go farther in the North. The Emperor suggested that the army could
leave after the Lankan war was over. Rajadithya did not want to go against the
words of his father, the then Chozha Emperor. He waited patiently for the
Lankan war to end. But the enemies were not patient. The King of the Twin
Provinces, Kannara Thevan, came with a huge army to invade the Chozha
Kingdom. As he travelled south to invade us, Boothukan, the Kanga King joined
forces with him. Those were two huge armies. At a glance it looked as if the
North and the South seas merged into one great ocean eager to swallow the
Chozha Kingdom. In that vast ocean of their army there were many, many giant
whales, I mean the elephants, and many sharks, I mean the horses. At one time it
appeared that the vast ocean would drown the entire Chozha Kingdom, as the
seas would swallow the earth at the time of apocalypse. Our spies ran all the way
up here to break the devastating news of invasion.

“Even that happened for good, said Emperor Paranthaka. If our armies had

travelled up north to fight the enemy they would have been fatigued by the long
journey and would have lost the enthusiasm to fight. That way it was better to
face the enemy in the home ground. It was easy to corner them on all the four
sides and vanquish them in our homeland. The Emperor allowed us to travel
only when we got the news that the enemy’s army had reached Thirupathi.

“Rajadithya was raring to go. And the moment he got the Emperor’s permission
he headed a huge army up North. The army consisted of three hundred thousand
infantrymen, fifty thousand horsemen, ten thousand elephants, two thousand
chariots, three hundred and twenty generals and thirty two Chieftains. I was
fortunate to be one of them; and was unfortunate to come back alive.

After three days of travel the armies clashed against each other at a place called
Thakkolam which was two miles north from Kanchi.

“Adithya, we have heard about the war between Devendra and Vrithirasura in
our mythology. We also know about the Rama - Ravana war and the Pandava Kaurava war. But those who saw the Thakkolam war would say that the
mythological wars were nothing but small skirmishes. We were outnumbered in
the ratio of one to two. I came to know later that the army of the enemy had five
hundred thousand infantry men and thirty thousand trained elephants. So what?
There was no one on the enemy side who was half as valiant as your ancestor
Rajadithya. So the Goddess of Valour and the Goddess of Victory were clearly
on our side.

“The war lasted for ten days. It was difficult even to take a count of the soldiers
who lost their lives in the war. Dead elephants resembling black hillocks were
scattered all over the battle field. Both the sides had lost heavily. But the
enemy’s side became weak quite soon. The enemies soon found out the reason.
Wherever Rajadithya’s elephant went proudly displaying the Tiger flag, the
Goddess of Victory was following suit. Whenever a section of our army felt
disheartened Rajadithya would go there along with his elephant. As soon as the

soldiers saw the huge beast and the greatest warrior of our times sitting on it,
they became excited and attacked the enemy with three times' greater ferocity
than what they did before.

The enemies who were closely following the events of the war hatched a mean
conspiracy. We came to know of it only much later. The person who hatched the
conspiracy and the one who executed it was none other than the Kanga King,
Boothukan. Suddenly the treacherous king hoisted the white flag of peace on his
elephant, lifted both his hands above his head and approached our army
repeating the words, “surrender” again and again. Rajadithya was near him. I
think he must have done that only after seeing Rajadithya’s elephant.
Rajadithya’s heart melted when he saw the enemy king surrendering to him. He
wanted to know whether the King of the Twin Provinces himself wants to stop
the war or was the Kanga King parting ways to save him.

He blew his conch. He ordered his body guards to stand away. He asked the
enemy king Boothukan to approach his elephant. Boothukan kept his hands
folded till he approached Rajadithya. Rajadithya even saw tears in his eyes. His
heart melted more.

The greatest warrior of his times, the one and only Rajadithya forgot the sane
advice given by the great Tamil sage Thiruvalluvar - “Hidden inside the hands of
an enemy folded in supplication will be a weapon to kill; even an enemy’s tears
are of the same kind.”

Rajadithya was moved by the enemy’s tears. So he let Boothukan come very
close to him and asked him, “What is the news?” Boothukan’s response made
Rajadithya hate him.

The treacherous king told him that he knew for sure that the armies of the Twin

Provinces would be crushed in the encounter. Hence he advised Kannara Devan
to surrender to the Chozha forces. Since Kannara Devan refused he came alone
to surrender. Rajadithya was furious.

He told him that he would never have such a traitor on his side. He advised him
to go back to his side and fight on the side of his ally, Kannara Devan. As
Rajadithya was talking Boothukan committed the meanest treachery ever
recorded in the history of Kings. He took out this bow and shot a poisoned arrow
into the chest of Rajadithya. The great Chozha warrior fell down. Nobody was
prepared for that mean act of betrayal from Boothukan. The Chozha warriors
and Rajadithya’s bodyguards could not understand what happened. Everything
happened in a flash. They heard Rajadithya telling the enemy king to go back to
his side. The next moment they saw Boothukan driving his elephant hard to run
away from the scene.

Rajadithya died while remaining seated on the elephant. It was the most
devastating news for our army. It was as if a giant lightning had struck every
soldier in the army. The grief of our army was so much that for a moment they
simply forgot to fight. Chieftains, generals and soldiers stopped fighting and
started wailing. No wonder the enemy gained an upper hand. Very soon our
army was forced to retreat from the war. And it was quite easy to drive away an
army which was fleeing the battle field. I am ashamed to say that I was one of
those who fled the battle at that time. The enemy’s army had reached up to the
banks of River Kedilam.

We regained our consciousness only when we reached here. I took my family
from Thirukkovalur and left them at my fort in Malainadu. I started gathering an
army on the slopes of the mountains. I came back here every now and then to
drive away the enemy forces that had set up their base here. Even then the
enemy did not leave this place for a long time. They stayed here and were quite a
nuisance to our Kingdom. Kanchi was under their control. Three years ago you
killed Veerapandiyan and came here to reclaim the city of Kanchi.”

“Thatha, I know the entire history. Even then I love to hear about Rajadithya’s
story again and again. It never ceases to amaze me. But tell me this, Thatha.
Why did you remind me now of Rajadithya?”

“My Child, your grandfather’s brother, Rajadithya wanted to extend the Chozha
Empire up to the banks of River Ganges. He died without realizing his dream.
Now the whole Kingdom says that my grandson is no less than his illustrious
ancestor Rajadithya. People are saying that you are going to fulfil Rajadithya’s
dreams. I don’t want you to fall to treachery as he did. That’s why I reminded
you of his story.

“Thatha! My grandfather’s brother lost his life because of a mean conspiracy.
Why do you remind me of that story? After all I am not going to war. I am not
going to the enemy’s place to be betrayed. I am just going to see my father’s
friends. I don’t think they’ll cheat me, Thatha.”

“Listen to me, my child. Our sage Thiruvalluvar said that there might be an arm
hidden inside the hands folded in supplication or in the tears of an enemy. The
same sage says elsewhere that the internal enmity is more dangerous than the
external one.

‘You need not fear the enemy who like a sword is coming to attack you; but
beware of the enemy in the guise of a friend.’

“My Child, you are now going in the midst of your enemies who are hiding
under the cloak of friendship. I have tried my best to stop you. But you won’t
listen. They have called you to mediate on a dispute concerning the Chozha
Kingdom. I also learn that they are planning to get one of Sambuvaraiyar’s
daughters married to you. But I still do not know what their real intentions are.
You also do not know. There are many kings in this great country dying to give

their daughters to you in marriage. You do not need this Sambuvaraiyar’s
daughter for your career. I also learn that they are going to divide the Chozha
Empire into two and give one half to you, while the other half goes to your uncle
Madhuranthakan. I don’t know what kind of scam will be there in that Partition
Plan. Whatever it may be I am going back to Thirukkovalur and will come back
with my guards to wait for you at the banks of River Vellaru. When you are
staying at Sambuvaraiyar’s palace if you suspect anybody or anything, send
word to me.”

The old King knew that that Adithya Karikalan had not been listening to him.
His attention was elsewhere.

“Thatha! Look there.” Adithya Karikalan spoke with trepidation. The valiant old
man looked in the direction pointed out by him.

Chapter 3 - The Falcon And The Dove

Adithya Karikalan pointed to a Mandapam. The Mandapam was made of stone.
Some philanthropist might have built it for the convenience of the travellers. It
provided shelter from the sun and rain. The structure was old and the outer walls
clearly exhibited the signs of ageing. There were some sculpted images near the
entrance of the Mandapam. The old man, Malaiyaman, could not see them with
his failing eye sight.

“Do you see that, Thatha?”

“You mean the Mandapam, my child? I don’t see anything special about it. The
Mandapam looks empty to me. Nobody is in there.”

“I now know for sure that you’ve become old, Thatha. Your eyes are failing. See
there. Don’t you see a falcon? Oh My God! How huge it is! See how broad its
wings are. But what a cruelty, Thatha! It’s holding a small dove in its legs. The
sharp nails of the falcon are piercing the dove. The dove is bleeding. Can’t you
see the blood, Thatha? What a surprise! There is another dove nearby. The
second dove is hovering near the falcon. Perhaps this is the beloved of the
captured bird. She’s flying very close to the dangerous falcon. She’s pleading for
her lover’s life. She’s begging the falcon to spare her lover. But wait, is the dove
fighting with the falcon or pleading with him? Oh My God! How bold she is!
She is now trying to fight with the falcon. She is going to fight with the giantbird for her beloved’s life. But Thatha do you think that the falcon will have
mercy on the dove? No, it won’t. Never. It must have eaten many doves like this
one. See the falcon’s huge body. It has eaten many doves in the past and that
explains his fat body. Oh Evil Falcon! Here I am coming to kill you.”

Adithya Karikalan took a pebble and threw at the falcon. The pebble hit the
Mandapam and fell down.

“Devil! Giant! You deserve this and much more”

Adithya Karikalan laughed in a devilish manner.

His grandfather Malaiyaman already had doubts about his grandson’s sanity. The
suspicion got stronger now.

“Thatha, why are you looking at me like that? For heaven’s sake please go near
the Mandapam and have a look.”

Malaiyaman went near the Mandapam and looked at the place where Karikalan’s
stone had fallen. He saw a sculpture there. A falcon was holding a dove in its
legs. Another dove was fighting with the falcon. The sculpture looked very real.

Malaiyaman returned to his grandson.

“Yes, my child. I’ve become old. My eyesight is failing. I could not see the
sculpture till I went near it. Good work of art.”

“That’s too mild a word, Thatha. It’s wonderful. It’s a miracle on stone. Must
have been done by some artist from the Mahendra Varman - Mamallan period.
At first I thought it was not a sculpture but a real scene.”

“Adithya, the miracle is not just in the stone. It’s in your eyes as well. It’s in your
mind too. Hundreds of travellers pass through this way. Many of them would not
have even cared to look at the sculpture. The rest would have just given a
cursory glance. Only somebody gifted like you can appreciate the art in the
stone.”

“I am not appreciating, Thatha. I am not surprised. I am furious. I want to
destroy the sculpture right now. I don’t want to praise the man who created such
a cruel sculpture.”

“What is this I am hearing, Karikala? When did your heart, which used to be as
strong as a diamond, become so soft? The falcon devouring the dove is its given
nature. If a lion were to show compassion to sheep it won’t be a lion. It too
would become a sheep. Those who want to sit on the throne have to destroy their
enemies and traitors. Those who want to become great Emperors and bring the
whole world under their sway have to kill their enemies. If the falcon did not kill
the dove how can it be a falcon? Why are you upset by its act, Karikala?”

“Thatha, you speak the truth. But should not the falcon be compassionate after
seeing the lady dove pleading so passionately for her beloved? Should it not
release the dove at least for the sake of its lover? Ok, tell me this, Thatha. When
you are about to kill your enemy, if his lover were to fall at your feet and beg for
your mercy what will you do? Will you not show mercy on your enemy?”

“Never Karikala, Never! If a woman comes in between I’ll just push her away
with my left foot and kill my enemy. I’d have no qualms about that act. Didn’t
our saint Thiruvalluvar say that the enemies would carry weapons in the hands
folded in supplication or in their tears? In a way a woman’s tears are more
dangerous than a man’s, because a woman’s tears have the powers to melt our
heart. And a person who lets his heart melt can’t do anything great in his life.

He’ll be far worse than a woman.”

“Thatha, why are you degrading women? That would be an insult to my mother,
who is a woman and who also happens to be your daughter.”

“Listen, my child. The love I have for my daughter … there is not even a pale
comparison to that in this whole world. I had six sons, my child. They were all
great warriors. They were like the legendary Bheema and Arjuna. But alas, I lost
them all in the battle-field. I was never sad when I heard about the death of my
dear sons. But when your mother got married and went away from me to adorn
the Chozha throne ... Oh my God ... I was devastated. But I did not show my
feelings. Not even to my daughter, my child. Do you know what I told your
mother before her marriage? I said:

’Daughter dearest, you are going to marry an emperor. Don’t be proud on that
account. Marrying such a famous king will only add to your woes. Many of your
maids will be far happier than you. Prepare yourself for a life of grief and
misery. If you don’t bear children to your husband he will marry other women.
You should never grieve for that, my dear.

If sons are born to you, bring them up as warriors. And if you hear that your
sons died in the battlefield you should not shed tears for them. If your husband is
happy, be happy. If your husband is sad then go out of the way to make him
happy. If your husband is sick, you should attend on him. And if he dies then you
die with him. Even if your heart bleeds you should never shed tears.

This is how the women from the Malaiyaman clan live.’

“That was the advice I gave to my daughter, to your mother when she got
married. I am proud to say that my daughter has never gone against my advice so
far. Karikala, she has brought you and your brother up as matchless warriors.
Ever since your father fell ill, she has been by his side night and day attending to
him. I am really proud to have that gem as my daughter, Karikala.”

“Thatha, whenever I think of my mother, my heart bursts in pride. But let me ask
you one thing. Let’s say my father is being held by his worst enemy. Let’s say
he’s going to kill him. He’s coming near him with a drawn sword. What will my
mother do then? Will she beg the enemy to spare her husband’s life? Especially
when the enemy is someone known to her?”

“My child! Your mother will never beg for her husband’s life. And that too from
an enemy. Malaiyaman’s daughter will never insult the clan she was born in or
the clan she was married into. She’ll consider her husband’s enemy as her
enemy. And if her husband dies she’ll fall on him and die too. Or else she’ll
harden her heart and decide to live. And if she did so, it will be for the sole
purpose of revenging her husband’s death.”

Adithya Karikalan let out a long sigh.

“Can I go now, Thatha?”

“Is it absolutely necessary that should you go?”

“Do you still have doubts, Thatha? We have come more than half way.”

“Yes, we have. I first asked you not to go. Then I changed my mind. After
hearing about your brother I thought its better that you go. But I don’t think
Arulmozhivarman would have died.”

“Nor do I.”

“When your father was young, we did not know where he was for some time. It
was only much later that our soldiers found him in an island in Srilanka.
Similarly Arulmozhi must be in some island. He is sure to come back after some
time. But then the news of his death has made the Chozha country erupt into a
fury. Your parents must also be in a state of grief. This is the time you should be
with them and offer solace. When you go there it’s better to go as a friend of
Pazhuvettaraiyars rather than as their enemy. That’s the only reason I let you
accept Sambuvaraiyar’s invitation. He has deliberately avoided me. If I had been
invited I would have surely come along with you.”

“Do you fear for my safety? Do you think I am an imbecile?”

“No, Karikala! Never! I know your valour. I won’t think twice to send you in the
midst of an enemy army consisting of ten thousand men armed to their teeth. But
I tremble in fear to send you before a cunning woman who is shedding tears to
distract your attention.”

“I don’t think Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter is that cunning. I hear that she is a timid
girl who is afraid to come in the presence of men. Kandhanmaran has told me.
Let me make one thing very clear, Thatha. I am not that rash to marry a girl
without getting my parents’ blessings. I also know that there are two women in
your own clan waiting to be married off.”

“I never thought of that, Karikala. My eldest son has two daughters. But I have
no idea of burdening you with them. Already the Chieftains of Chozha Kingdom
are burning in jealousy because my daughter is married to the reigning Emperor.
And that jealousy has grown into enmity. And if this too happens then they will
join forces to invade my country. I’ll be happy if you marry Sambuvaraiyar’s
daughter. You see, I have become old. My body has become weak. At times I
feel that weakness in my mind too. I even wonder whether this will be the last
time I see you. Perhaps it is. I don’t think I can help you any longer. You need
some new friends for sure. You need people who are interested in your welfare.
Hence I’d be very happy if you marry Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter.”

“Thatha, I can’t do that even for your happiness. I am going to Sambuvaraiyar’s
palace as a guest not to seek his friendship. Or to marry his daughter. You can be
peaceful.”

“Then why should you go my child? Why don’t you tell me the truth? I
overheard your friends’ conversation. I heard that the devil whom the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar has married has sent you a message. And you are going to
Kadambur only for that reason.”

“You are right, Thatha.”

“Oh My God! What times are we in? The Chozha clan in which you are born has
a two-thousand year old tradition. Some of your ancestors had brought the whole
world under their rule. At times they were mere chieftains who ruled over the
city of Uraiyur and its surroundings. Some were like Lord Ram, faithfully
wedded to a single woman all their lives. Some married many women and gave
birth to many warriors. Some worshipped Lord Shiva and some Lord Vishnu.
Some were staunch atheists. But every one of them had a blemish-less character.
They never indulged in anything scandalous. They have never fallen for others’
wives. My child, you can marry as many virgins as you want. Your grandfather’s
father - Emperor Paranthaka - married seven women. You can be like him.

Nobody can raise their finger against you. But never look at that devilish woman
who is married to the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

“Forgive me, Thatha. I’ll never do anything of that sort. I’ll never bring
ignominy to the Chozha clan or the Malaiyaman clan.

“Then why did you accept her invitation, my child?”

“Let me tell the truth at least to you. Once I did her a grievous wrong. I am going
to seek her pardon.”

“What words, Karikala? How can you beg the pardon of a woman? I can’t bear
to hear those words.”

For a while Karikalan hung down his head remaining silent. Then he gathered
courage and told his grandfather everything. He spoke about how he searched
for Veerapandiyan and how Nandini begged for his life and how he mercilessly
killed him and how he had been suffering since that day.

“That memory is torturing me, Thatha. I won’t be peaceful unless I see her once
and seek her forgiveness. It appears that she is ready to forgive me. She is also
interested in avoiding succession problems in the Chozha Empire. She has called
me only for that purpose. I’ll finish my work and come back to Kanchi very
soon. And once I come back I’ll take a ship to search for my brother in the seven
seas of this world.”

The old man sighed.

“Many things are becoming clear to me. Whatever appeared mysterious earlier is
now very clear. One thing is very sure, my child. Nobody can win over Destiny.”

Chapter 4 - The Ayyanar Temple

When Adithya Karikalan was in conversation with his grandfather on the banks
of River Kedilam Azhwarkkadian and Vandhiya Thevan were engaged in a
strange mission at a place called Thirukkanaattumullur on the Northern Banks of
River Coleroon.

In those days Coleroon, otherwise known as North Cauvery, was considered as
much a holy river as its counterpart, the Southern Cauvery. In the Tamil month
of Aippasi (corresponding to October-November of the English Calendar) Lord
Shiva, the principal deity of the temple was in Thirukkanaattumullur would
come in a procession riding on the traditional bull to the river banks to give
dharshan to his devotees. Every afternoon will be festival time during the whole
of that month. People from the nearby villages would gather there for the
occasion.

The town had a small Vishnu temple as well. Lord Vishnu also would come in
procession to the banks of Coleroon riding on his vehicle, Garuda, the bird.

That was the first day of the month and people had gathered in large numbers to
take a holy dip in the river. Azhwarkkadian planted a branch of a Jamun tree on
the banks and challenged the visitors to a wordy duel.

“CHALLENGE! CHALLENGE! I have come here to establish the supremacy of
the religion of Vaishnavism in this island. Saivites, Buddhists, Advaitins,
Kapalikas, Kalamukas, Jains and Sakthas... I invite you to a debate. If you win
I’ll bear you on my shoulders and go all over the town. And if you lose you’ll
have to give whatever you have. I’ll let you wear only a small piece of cloth on

your waist. You’ll have to give everything else to me. CHALLENGE!
CHALLENGE”

Lying before him were heaps of rosary beads, the vessels used by the sages, earjewels, silk cloth and gold coins. Anybody could infer that he must have been
arguing for a long time. And must have had a continuous streak of victories.

Vandhiya Thevan stood close to him leaning on a Kadamba tree. He was dressed
only up to his waist. And was holding an unsheathed sword in his hand. From
his appearance and posture one could easily guess that he had been using his
sword to frighten away those who tried to use violence to win the wordy duel
with Azhwarkkadian. And that was made clear by the words he spoke to a group
of noisy Saivites.

“I warn you. You are welcome to have a debate with this man. But anybody who
resorts to violence, anybody who tries to touch this man will become a prey to
my sword.”

He swirled the sword twice to demonstrate his intentions. The Saivites who were
an angry mob only a few seconds ago became silent and peaceful.

One of them shouted at Azhwarkkadian:

“Oh Vaishnavite! Don’t be too proud of your victories. Go to Thirunaaraiyur.
There you’ll meet Nambiyandaar Nambi who will defeat you in the debate and
make you run for your life.”

“Ask your Thirunaaraiyur Nambi to argue with Anandha Bhattar of
Thirunarayanapuram...” Azhwarkkadian shot back.

Azhwarkkadian shouted “CHALLENGE” “CHALLENGE” several times. This
time there were no takers. He removed the branch of the Jamun tree and planted
in its stead a victory flag which had the Vaishnavite symbols of the conch and
the disc. Some Vaishnavites had been watching his actions. When they saw the
victory flag they all ran to him, lifted him on their shoulders and hailed his
victory.

“Narayana is our Lord. Come let’s worship him.”

They started dancing around him singing the same refrain.

There was a competition among them in inviting Azhwarkkadian for lunch at
their homes. Azhwarkkadian accepted the invitation and told them in a majestic
voice. “Yes, we’ll come to your place for food.”

He took Vandhiya Thevan with him. They had tamarind rice, curd rice and a
sweet porridge. The dishes were so delicious that they had their stomachs filled
up. Azhwarkkadian surveyed the spoils of his debating game. He retained a
piece of silk cloth and gave all the rest to the Vaishnavites and requested them to
pay whatever they considered to be the worth of those things. He told them that
he was keen on establishing the supremacy of Vaishnavism and for that purpose
travelling up North up to Haridwar. And therefore he needed gold coins for the
travel. The Vaishnavites were pleased and gave him more gold than what those
things were worth.

Azhwarkkadian and Vandhiya Thevan took leave of their hosts and left for
Kadambur.

River Coleroon was in floods at that time. They used a boat to cross the river.
They had to leave their horses behind. The boat was overcrowded. It capsized
when it was about to reach the bank. Vandhiya Thevan had to swim along with
the other passengers. In the process he lost his waist band which he had been
preserving for years. The waist band had some signet rings and the message
given by Princess Kunthavai. They were all washed away. He also lost the gold
coins. In fact they had planned the strategy of a religious debate only earn
money to buy horses for their travel. Of course their strategy had worked and
they had money. But they could not buy horses anywhere in the vicinity. Horses
might be available for sale in the weekly market in Kadambur. Or else they had
to travel all the way up to Thiruppathiripulliyur for buying horses.

The friends debated whether they should now go to Kadambur or not. They
listed out the pros and cons of travelling up to Kadambur. They might get some
news about Adithya Karikalan’s travel plans. They might know whether the
Crown Prince had left Kanchi and the route taken by him. But they should not be
seen by anybody known to them in Kadambur. It would be a disaster if they met
Kandhanmaran at Kadambur. And if Pazhuvettaraiyar’s retinue had reached
Kadambur already then their staying in that place would be highly risky.

Vandhiya Thevan opened the conversation.

“Vaishnava, you know how to scale a wall. Why don’t you bring two horses
from Sambuvaraiyar’s stable?”

“Yes, I can scale a wall. But, my friend, I don’t think Sambuvaraiyar’s horses
can. And that’s the problem.”

“If Pazhuvur’s retinue is there we can steal two horses from them. Once they
drove away my horse. I want to take revenge.”

Then they started talking about their earlier meeting at Kadambur and the
mysterious happenings of that eventful night.

They reached Kadambur at sunset. Kadambur, as they expected, was abuzz with
activity. The Palace and the main entrance to the Fort were decorated with
festoons. Security was tight around the main gate and along the walls of the
Fort. After all, the Crown Prince of the Chozha Kingdom was paying a visit.
Added to that, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Pazhuvettaraiyar along with his
wife the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur was also paying a visit. These dignitaries
would come with a large retinue. The town would be in a festive mood for some
days.

The two friends heard the people talking about all these things in the streets of
Kadambur. From what they heard they could infer that none of the dignitaries
had yet arrived. They also learned that Kandhanmaran, son of Sambuvaraiyar,
had gone all the way to Kanchi to escort Adithya Karikalan safely to Kadambur.
In the midst of the excitement surrounding the visit of the Crown Prince the two
friends also heard some people talking about the ‘drowned prince’ in a hushed
voice. When such a great tragedy had struck the nation it was not somehow right
to have this feasts and festivals.

Azhwarkkadian and Vandhiya Thevan heard what the people talked. But they did
not evince any interest in the conversation. They crossed the town. They did not
want to stay in the town for the night. They were scouting for a Mandapam in
ruins or an abandoned inn somewhere in the outskirts of the city. In the extreme
case of their not finding any such place they planned to go to
Veeranarayanapuram and stay there for the night. They could peacefully sleep in

the 100-pillared-Mandapam of the Vishnu Temple. After what they experienced
the previous night they were badly in need of a good night’s sleep.

As they crossed the city limits they saw a dense bamboo forest and an Ayyanar
Temple inside the forest.

“Vaishnava, I can’t walk even a step more. Let’s stay in the temple for the night.
This is the best place to keep away from the eyes of people.”

“You are wrong, young man. What’s the guarantee that persons like us would not
choose this place for the night stay?”

“If such people come with horses it will be all the more better.”

“No horse can enter this bamboo forest. Even men will find it difficult to come
in.”

“There has to be a way somewhere. It could be just a single track. There has to
be a way for the temple priest to reach the temple.”

The two men were walking in circle around the bamboo bushes. At last they
found out a narrow single-track path in the middle of dense growth. It was no
mean achievement to walk through the path without being hurt by the thorns in
the bush. After walking for a few minutes they arrived at a clearing. There was a
small Ayyanar temple. There was a small altar in front of the temple. Images of
elephants and horses made of mud were found near the altar. It was the custom

of the devotees to gift such images to god if their prayers were answered.

Vandhiya Thevan was in a mood to tease.

“Why should we worry about horses? Why can’t we borrow two from Ayyanar
himself?”

“Haven’t you heard the Tamil proverb that one should not get into a river relying
on a mud horse?”

“Vaishnava, our Ayyanar is a powerful god. He would grant our prayers
immediately. He is not like your Vishnu who would make his devotees, suffer,
wait and yearn while he sleeps in day time.”

“Then do you mean to say that your God will breathe life into these mud horses?
Well, that will be a real blessing. It will save us a lot of money.”

“If your devotion is real even mud horses will come to life. Tell me what is our
body? It’s made of sand and Lord Brahma breathed life into it.”

“Well said. We quite often forget that this body is made of mud. It is only to
remind that basic fact that we make a paste of the holy sand and apply it on our
bodies as religious symbols. That’s what our Vaishnavite Acharyas have ordered
us to do.”

Vandhiya Thevan whispered “ssh ... “and held Azhwarkkadian’s hand and
pointed out at a distance. The sun had set a little earlier. Darkness was slowly
setting in the bamboo forest. In the fading light it appeared as if Ayyanar’s mud
horses had come to life and were moving. An elephant and a horse shifted
places. Vandhiya Thevan did not know whether to believe the miracle happening
right before his eyes. At the same time he did not want to miss the chance of
showing Ayyanar’s divine powers to Azhwarkkadian.

“Vaishnava, can you see what’s happening?”

Before he finished the sentence Azhwarkkadian gripped his hand hard and
placed a finger on his lips asking him to maintain absolute silence. Then without
taking off his hand he led Vandhiya Thevan to a safe hiding place behind the
bushes.

The elephant and the horse moved a little creating a space between them. A
man’s head appeared in the space. The head turned in all the four directions. It
was a ghastly sight to see a human head very near the altar turning in all the
directions. Vandhiya Thevan who had seen many ghastly sights in his life
shivered in fear. But the firm Azhwarkkadian’s hands gave him reassurance.
Vandhya Thevan felt protected.

As they were watching, the head moved up a little more. Now they could see up
to the man’s chest. Then they saw the whole man. The place from which he
emerged did not look like a hole in the ground. It appeared as the dark passage to
the nether world.

The friends recognised the man in a few seconds. He was a part of Ravidasan’s
conspiracy gang while apparently working for the Kadambur Palace. He was
Idumbankari.

The two friends recognised him at the same time and looked at each other
exchanging meaningful glances. Idumbankari did not make any attempt to cover
the hole through which he came. He looked around a few more times and then
started walking towards the Ayyanar Temple. He opened the door of the temple
and walked in. A few minutes later they could see a dim flickering light in the
temple. They inferred that a lamp inside the temple had been lit.

“Thambi what do you think of this?” Azhwarkkadian asked in a whisper.

“I think Ayyanar is a powerful god. Didn’t you see the horse coming to life?”

“That’s okay. What do you think of the man we just saw?”

“Should be the temple priest. Come, let’s go in and pray.”

“Wait. Let’s see if somebody else comes to pray.”

“Do you think anybody else will come?”

“Then why should he light the lamp?”

“What’s the big deal in a priest lighting a lamp at the temple?”

“Thambi, can’t you recognise him?”

“Why not? He’s the one who got me a horse at the banks of Southern banks of
Coleroon. Yes, he is Idumbankari. I think I can ask him to get me a horse now.”

“Good Idea.”

“Why, you don’t like it?”

“Idumbankari is a part of Ravidasan’s gang.”

“Then I have a better idea.”

“What? What?”

“While Idumbankari is busy serving God let me find out from where he
appeared all of a sudden.”

“How is that possible?”

“Can’t I look into the hole from which he came out?”

“Possible. But the risks... “

“There is nothing worthwhile which is not risky.”

“It’s your call.”

“Vaishnavite, you be here and find out what’s happening.”

“That’s not a problem. Do you have any idea where this tunnel goes?”

“Yes, I do. I want to test my hypothesis.”

“But why?”

“It might be useful sometime. Who knows?”

They heard some voices at a distance.

“We can’t wait any longer. I am sure you’ll be here till I come back. Or will you
ditch me in the same way Sugriva ditched his brother Vali when the latter went
into a cave to fight with a demon?”

“I’ll be here as long as I am alive. But what’s the guarantee you’ll return?”

“I’ll return if I am alive.”

Vandhiya Thevan reached the hole in a few giant steps. And jumped in. The next
second he vanished. For a second it appeared as if the gaping hole swallowed
him alive.

Idumbankari came out of the temple. He saw the open hole. He went near the
altar and rotated the trident which appeared to be embedded on the temple floor.

The mud elephant and the horse which had moved away earlier came closer
again. The hole disappeared. Idumbankari then moved to the entrance of the
temple. At the same time Ravidasan, Soman Sambavan and others arrived there
from different directions. Azhwarkkadian hid himself behind the bamboo
bushes. Ravidasan sat on the steps. Others sat on the floor before him.

“Friends, time has come to fulfil our vows.”

“You have been saying these words for the past six months.”

“There is nothing wrong in it. For the past six months the D-day remained very
close. Now it’s even closer. It’s a matter of a few days. We have got news that
Adithya Karikalan has left Kanchi already. The old man from Thirukkovalur,
King Malaiyaman, tried his best to stop him. I hear all his efforts failed.”

“What’s the guarantee he will not be stopped on the way?”

“Adithya Karikalan will never change his mind. He won’t listen to anybody.”

“What if the message sent by his sister reached him?”

“How can it? We have kept him bound in the forest.”

“Beautiful. I saw him in the northern banks of Coleroon this morning. I saw
another enemy with him.”

“Who was that?”

“The fake Vaishnavite.”

“Then we will have to be very careful. We should make sure that they do not
meet Adithya Karikalan.”

“That’s doing things in a roundabout way. We could have killed the messenger
and sealed his fate. Why did the Queen ask us to keep him alive?”

“Friends, I too did not understand her logic first. But later I realised that the
Queen is a better strategist than I. She asked us to let him live for a very
important reason. There is no need for you to know that at this point of time.
Let’s not bother about Vandhiya Thevan. But if you see that Vaishnavite
anywhere, kill him on the spot. Don’t even think.”

Chapter 5 - The Deadly Underground Tunnel

Vandhiya Thevan entered the deadly Tunnel and walked down a few steps. Then
it was level ground. There was little light. He walked another ten to fifteen steps.
Then he heard the sound of some wheels moving. The next moment he was
engulfed in absolute darkness. He painfully remembered his earlier resolution of
not meddling in affairs that did not concern him.

Oh My God! What is my mission? How crucial it is? Why did I neglect my work
and enter this tunnel? Where will this lead me to? And what dangers are waiting
for me there? Why do I always end up doing something foolish every time? When
will I be able to shed off my impulsive rashness?

He decided to abandon the venture and go back. He turned around. He could feel
the steps. But he could not find the opening above him. He tried to feel with his
hand. It was of no use. Somebody must have closed the hole from above.
Vandhiya Thevan was shocked. He was sweating profusely. He now tried harder
to open the closed hole. He could hear voices at a distance. Perhaps the voices
came from the people who had come to the Ayyanar temple. Idumban Kari was
waiting for somebody. His lighting the lamp at the temple must have been a
signal for somebody to come there. If that was true then Vandhiya Thevan
finding a way out of the tunnel at that time might be a great blunder. How long
would they be at the temple? He could never know. If they were all Idumban
Kari’s men like Ravidasan then they would talk for a long, long time. But why
were they assembled there? And what were they talking about? What kind of
conspiracy were they hatching at the moment? The Vaishnavite fanatic must be
watching them.

There is no point in standing here in the tunnel bathed in sweat and gasping for
breath. The only sensible way is to go further down the tunnel. Having got down

the tunnel let me at least find out where does it lead to.

Having made a firm decision Vandhiya Thevan marched forward. There was
level ground beneath his feet. But the surface was rough and bumpy. They must
have hewn the tunnel through stone. He had a broad idea where the tunnel
would lead him to - probably Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace. But where exactly in the
Palace? It might take him to the treasury. Or to the ladies’ chambers. He knew
that the palaces generally had these types of secret passages. When the Palace is
under siege and the Kings needed these secret passage to escape from their
enemies. Generally in times of danger the top priority would be to save the
women of the palace. So these tunnels usually landed in the ladies chambers.

To carry the treasures out of the Palace in times of crisis was at least as
important as saving the ladies. So there was an equally good chance that the
tunnel ended in Sambuvaraiyar’s treasury.

Idumban Kari had used this tunnel to come out. That made the chances of
landing at the treasury much brighter. These conspirators had been plundering
the treasury of the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar with the help of the Junior Queen. In
the same way they might have planned to rob King Sambuvaraiyar.

But why should they indulge in such an act when the Crown Prince and other
important people were visiting the Palace? Could they possibly have other
motives as well? Vandhiya Thevan remembered what he saw and heard in
Thiruppurambayam War Memorial. The image of the long sword with the
emblem of fish held by the Junior Queen flashed before his eyes. Vandhiya
Thevan shivered. Perhaps they had a motive far more dangerous than a simple
robbery. If he knew where the path led him it would be easier for him to
sabotage the plans of conspirators.

He had been walking through the tunnel only for a few minutes. But it appeared
a very long time because of the darkness. The ventilation was minimal. He was
gasping for breath. He was sweating as well. When he mentally calculated the
distance between the Ayyanar Temple and the Palace he felt overwhelmed.

They had walked from the front gates of the palace in a roundabout way. They
had to cross the streets and go through a forest. If they had come from the back
gates of the Palace using a direct route the distance to the Ayyanar temple would
have been far less. It should be within the range of an arrow-shot from the
Palace. If that was true he must have reached the outer walls of the palace by
now.

Vandhiya Thevan’s guess was right. He could feel a sudden gush of cool air. The
air refreshed him. He looked up. He could see light at a distance. He could even
hear voices. He must be under one of the several security posts lining the walls
of the palace. They must have made arrangements to let in fresh air into the
tunnel. But the structure allowed only air to pass. It was not possible to get down
into the tunnel from above. Nor was it possible to get out of the tunnel at that
point.

The thought that he had entered the Kadambur Palace and the gush of cool air
filled his mind with enthusiasm. The end of the tunnel could not be far from
here. Would that be the underground treasury? Would Sambuvaraiyar keep loads
of gems, diamonds, pearls and gold coins in his treasury? Would he be seeing the
human skeletons in the treasury as he saw in Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace? Would
the spiders living here too have spun a web over the mounds of gold coins?

As Vandhiya Thevan was engrossed in this speculation, his feet felt something.
He was shocked. Then he found out that they were steps and felt relieved. Yes,
he was going to climb up the stairs and then see Sambuvaraiyar’s treasury. Or
else it would be the ladies chambers in the palace.

Oh My God! Then I’d be finished. Ah! I almost forgot! Kandhanmaran’s sister.
Manimekalai. The dark beauty. She will be there.

When Vandhiya Thevan remembered that at one time he had plans of marrying
that girl, a smile escaped from his mouth. There was nobody to watch his
beautiful smile. What if he appeared before the ladies of the Palace when they
were dressing up! Vandhiya Thevan laughed.

The next moment his blood froze. His heart stopped beating. His eyes bulged
out. Oh My God! What a blood-chilling scene! He had been climbing the stairs.
As soon as he reached the top, when he was sure there were no further steps, he
looked around to see where he was. Hundreds and hundreds of fiery eyes were
staring at him. The eyes belonged to wild beasts of the forest. At first he decided
to run away. He decided to retrace his steps back to the Ayyanar temple.

But there was no way to go. When he reached the top step he heard a sound.
Perhaps the tunnel closed down on its own. But what a horrible sight! So many
wild beasts were waiting to devour him. There were tigers, leopards, lions, bears,
bison, wolves, foxes and even rhinoceroses. And there were two elephants too.
The animals were ready to pounce on him. But why they have not done that yet?
Oh My God! What a huge vulture. The gigantic owl. Bats that could swallow a
full human being. Was he dreaming? And there was a crocodile with its mouth
open baring its lethal teeth. But crocodiles would normally be in water. This was
dry ground. How did the crocodile come in the midst of the wild animals?

“Thank God!” Vandhiya Thevan shouted. For only then did he realise that the
beasts around him were not alive. He remembered his friend Kandhanmaran
talking about his ancestors’ passion for hunting wild animals. He also
remembered his friend describing the ’Hunter’s Hall’ in their palace where some
of the animals hunted by the members of the Royal Household were on display

as stuffed carcasses. Vandhiya Thevan now realised that he had just entered that
hall. In spite of that knowledge, it took some time for his body to stop shivering.

He went to every animal and touched it. He tried to move them. He even tried to
kick them. Thus he made sure that none of the animals were alive. Then he
started planning his course of action. The way through which he came had been
sealed. Should he go back and find the way out? Or should he try to find out
where was this Hunters’ Hall located in the Kadambur Palace? Or should he
attempt to find if the way led to some other chamber of the Palace? He searched
the walls in vain for possible exit points. With the passing of time Vandhiya
Thevan became more and more furious. Why the hell did I venture into this
pointless exercise and get trapped?

As he was walking along the walls he saw the face of an elephant embedded on
the wall. The face had a trunk and the tusks.

“Go to hell, damned elephant! It was because you started moving that I got
trapped in this underground dungeon.”

He shouted at the dead elephant. The elephant remained silent. Even living
elephants would have talked back. How can the stuffed carcass of an elephant
respond to his question? It did not even move its trunk.

“Why are you silent? Didn’t you hear my question?”

Vandhiya Thevan firmly held the tusks and turned them around. The next
moment a miracle happened there. As soon as the tusks were turned one of the
elephant’s ear moved. It then folded and showed a gaping hole in the wall.

Vandhiya Thevan was surprised beyond words. He put his face into the hole and
looked around.

He saw a young lady’s face. The lady was dark and beautiful. Her large eyes
were wide open. Surprise of surprises! He saw his own face next to the woman’s
face; close enough to be able to kiss her.

The woman’s eyes - which were wide open - opened wider still and expressed a
feeling of surprise which could not be transcribed in words. There was also a
little fear in that expression. She paused briefly and she moved her red, pearly
lips and shouted “Kooooooooooo”.

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked. He instinctively took his hands off the elephant’s
tusks. The next minute, the small gaping hole became the wall. There was no
hole, no woman. Nor could he hear the “Kooooooooooooo” sound which
resembled the sound of a group of beetles. It took some time for Vandhiya
Thevan to become his normal self.

He started thinking about the frightening scene he just witnessed.

Chapter 6 - Manimekalai

Manimekalai, the darling daughter of King Sambuvaraiyar had always been a
pampered child. Her father, mother and her elder brother Kandhanmaran
showered their love on her. She was virtually a despot in Sambuvaraiyar’s
Palace. Her slightest whims became the unwritten law within the four walls of
the Palace. Till very recently Manimekalai’s life was made up of song, dance and
sheer happiness. She had her first setback in life only a few months ago. Her
people forced her to do something which she strongly detested. She had been
trying hard to teach the elders in her family a basic lesson of life - ‘Obstinacy
never helps’. She failed miserably.

For the past two years whenever her brother Kandhanmaran returned from war
he would tell her about Vandhiya Thevan. He would sing praises of his valour,
his brave acts of war and his intelligence. He used to tell her that Vandhiya
Thevan was as handsome as the Love God himself, as valiant as the legendary
King Arjuna of Mahabharata and as great a strategist as Lord Krishna himself.

“He is the right man for you. He is the one who can break you, tame you and rid
you of all your monkey business.”

Manimekalai loved to hear about Vandhiya Thevan. But she would feign anger
in her voice and fight with her brother.

“Why do you keep raving about him all the time? Bring him here one day. Let
me see how good he is.”

“Done, sis.”

Manimekalai started seeing Vandhiya Thevan through the eyes of her fertile
imagination. She talked to him, laughed with him, played with him, fought with
him and then reconciled too - all in the grand castle built in her mind. She was
living with him in the hassle-free world of imagination. At times she would
describe him to her close friends. Four months ago her dream-castle and her
dreams were destroyed by the turn of events.

Kandhanmaran’s tone and voice were way different now.

“Vandhiya Thevan has no home, no post and no status. Forget that orphan,
Sister.”

He told her that his mission was to see her as the Chozha Empress sitting on the
famous Thanjavur Throne. He revealed his plans to her.

Madhuranthakan, an heir apparent to the Chozha throne, had already married the
daughter of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Kandhanmaran told his sister that she had to
become Madhuranthakan’s second wife. He was sure that Madhuranthakan was
going to be the next Chozha Emperor. And if only Manimekalai married him she
could be the Empress of all the three worlds. Perhaps the child born of her might
become the Emperor one day. Manimekalai’s parents endorsed Kandhanmaran’s
words.

But Manimekalai was boiling. Even without being seen by her Vandhiya Thevan
had stolen her heart. She could not think of anybody else in his place.

Manimekalai knew that Madhuranthakan was a coward who had never seen a
battlefield in his life. Till very recently he had been smearing holy ash all over
his body, wearing beads on his neck and telling the world that one day he was
going to become a saint.

This could be pardoned. But the unpardonable fact was that he had already been
married. Manimekalai had learnt that the women of the Thanjavur Palace are
very proud. They thought they were the only cultured people in the whole
Kingdom and looked down upon women from other parts of the Empire.
Manimekalai was irritated. Even if she were to get the Thanjavur throne, or for
that matter the celestial throne itself, she told her people in no uncertain terms
that she would never marry Madhuranthakan.

Another piece of information hardened her stand. When the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar came to Kadambur a few months ago she heard that his newly
married wife the Junior Queen had also come along. But the Junior Queen never
visited the ladies’ chambers of the Palace. At first this was surprising. And a
little hurting too. The women of the Kadambur Palace started talking ill of the
Junior Queen. They even despised her. And then slowly the truth came out.
Manimekalai came to know that the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur was not in the
closed palanquin that had come to the Palace. It was Madhuranthakan.
Manimekalai’s hatred for the Prince went sky high.

“Chee... that coward travelled in a closed palanquin disguised as a lady! And
they want me to marry him! Never!”

At the same time that Madhuranthakan was smuggled into the Palace in a closed
palanquin, Vandhiya Thevan had also arrived. Kandhanmaran had brought him
to the ladies chambers only for a short time. Manimekalai became shy all of a
sudden. She stood behind the other women and stole glances of her dream-lover.

She did not even have the chance of looking him directly on his face. And yet
Vandhiya Thevan’s smiling face got etched into her heart. His voice and the few
words he spoke got embedded in her mind.

Manimekalai then reopened the arguments with her brother. She told him clearly
that even if the three-eyed Lord Shiva were to appear before her and command
her to marry Madhuranthakan she would not budge. Though she had seen
Vandhiya Thevan only for a short time, she hinted to her brother that her heart
was lost to him. Kandhanmaran was furious. At first he spoke softly trying to
convince her. But when all his attempts failed he burst out.

“Vandhiya Thevan is not my friend. He is my enemy. He tried to kill me by
stabbing me in the back. And if you try to marry him I’ll kill you both.”

He showed the stab-wound to his sister. He also told her that it was only because
of the Junior Queen Nandini’s kindness that he was restored to life.

“And if you have even a morsel of love in your heart towards your only sibling
please forget Vandhiya Thevan.”

Manimekalai’s heart changed. She loved her brother Kandhanmaran more than
anybody else in the world. It was impossible to marry somebody who was her
brother’s avowed enemy, somebody who tried to kill her brother by stabbing him
in the back.

At the same time it was not possible for her to forget Vandhiya Thevan.
Vandhiya Thevan’s smiling face would appear in her heart at the most
unexpected time. The face came while she was day-dreaming. The face

dominated her nocturnal dreams as well.

All these robbed Manimekalai of her natural enthusiasm and happiness. She was
depressed all the time. The elders thought that the depression was because of the
delay in her marriage. Her friends in her age group made fun of her. Some tried
to lift her moods by fun and frolic. None of their ideas worked.

Manimekalai started regaining her enthusiasm after some time. She was relieved
to know that her parents and her brother had abandoned the idea of marrying her
to Madhuranthakan. They were now discussing her marriage with the Crown
Prince Adithya Karikalan.

There was nobody in Tamilnadu, man or woman, who did not know about the
valour and accomplishments of Adithya Karikalan. They also knew that for
some reason Karikalan had been delaying his marriage. Well, to marry
somebody like Adithya Karikalan... it was an honour one cannot even dream of.
Many princesses in the country were longing to be his wife. Manimekalai was
enthused by this new development.

When she learnt that Adithya Karikalan from Kanchi and the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar from Thanjavur were going to visit their Palace she became her
old enthusiastic, happy self once again. This time the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar
was bringing his new wife for real.

Manimekalai was overawed by Nandini. She was the one who saved her
brother’s life. She had heard a lot about Nandini’s beauty, her intelligence and
her qualities from her brother Kandhanmaran.

Her brother had also told her that she was the one who opened talks of
matrimonial alliance with the Crown Prince. Kandhanmaran had also told her
that when the Junior Queen stayed in their palace Manimekalai should be
personally taking care of her. Manimekalai loved the assignment. She had her
own reasons. She wanted to be friends with Nandini and learn the latest fashion
tricks of the proud Thanjavur ladies and later beat them in their own game in
their home ground.

Hence for the past one week Manimekalai was not just enthusiastic but was
excited. She was busy making arrangements for the Royal guests. She
concentrated on the portion allotted to Nandini. She made sure that nothing was
left out. Her brother was repeatedly insisting the need for providing top class
hospitality to Nandini.

Manimekalai gave hell to the workers of the Palace. She also tortured her
friends. Every object placed in Nandini’s room was shifted at least thirty times.

Manimekalai frequented the chambers reserved for Adithya Karikalan and his
friends quite often. She had heard that Adithya Karikalan was coming along with
his friend Parthibendra Pallavan.

‘How will his friend be? Will he remain loyal and faithful to the Crown Prince?
Or will he betray him? Who will change when, nobody knows. My brother’s
friend Vandhiya Thevan originally belonged to Adithya Karikalan’s camp. If only
he had not become a foe, if only he had not betrayed her brother, he too would
have come here now.

Though Manimekalai made herself busy with a host of exciting activities, she
could not completely forget that lovable traitor.

Manimekalai heard that the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur, Nandini, would arrive on
that day. She checked the chambers reserved for Nandini one last time. She came
before the mirror leaning on the wall. She saw her face in the mirror. She was
lost in thoughts. Her beauty was no less than the most beautiful woman of her
times. The thought made her contented.

When she decided to move away from the mirror she saw another face in the
mirror. And the other face was very close to hers. Close enough to brush against
her cheeks. That was the face of the warrior of the Vana Clan - Vandhiya Thevan
- which was troubling her in her waking state as well as in her dreams. Before
she could realise what was happening her mouth raised a strange sound.
“Kooooooooooooooooo”.

The other face vanished.

Chapter 7 - The Monkey Without A Tail

Manimekalai thought for a while. She clearly remembered seeing somebody.
Was it an apparition or a mere hallucination? Or was she dreaming? If it were a
dream she should be in a state of sleep. She pinched herself. It hurt. No, she was
not sleeping. This is the personal chamber being made ready for the stay of the
Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. Yes, she could now clearly see her face in that
marble-mirror. And there the oil lamp was burning. She looked at the wall
opposite to the mirror. She now remembered. There is a secret passage on the
wall opposite to the marble-mirror. The doors to the passage could be opened
either from this chamber or from the other end. Manimekalai placed her ears
close to the wall and listened. The door to the secret passage was made of wood.
She could hear some sound from the Hunters’ Hall which was on the other side
of the door.

She gently opened the door to the passage. She peeped into the Hunters’ Hall to
have a glimpse. A major part of the hall was plunged in darkness. There was a
small oil lamp in the corner of the hall. Suddenly the light from the lamp faded.
After a second or so it became bright again. Something must have gone past the
lamp. That explained the sudden fading of the light.

The face of the figure that blocked the light from the lamp..... Oh My God... did I
see that face in the mirror a little while ago? Or have I started seeing sights
which others don’t see? Am I hallucinating?

While still peering into the hall Manimekalai clapped her hands. “Who’s there?”
- she asked in a soft voice. She could hear somebody clearing their throat. A bat
which was hanging on the roof flew to the other end of the hall. And then she
heard a very light coughing sound.

While still remaining there she shouted for her maid “Chandramathi….. “

“Why, Amma? Any problem?”

“Take a lamp and come here. Right now.”

A few seconds later a maid appeared with a lamp in her hand.

“Why do you need a lamp here, Amma? The room is already well lit.”

“I want to go into the Hunters’ Hall.”

“There will be nothing but a few bats fluttering their wings.”

“No. A few minutes ago as I was seeing this mirror I saw a face near mine.”

“How did the face look like? Was that the face of Love God? Or the legendary
Arjuna of Mahabharata?” - The maid laughed.

“Hey Chandramathi, are you teasing me?”

“No, Amma. You always talk about a face which you frequently see in your
dreams. Perhaps the same person appeared in the mirror.”

“Yes, you are right. But this time it was real.”

“Almost all girls lose their minds at a stage in their lives. Your hallucination will
continue for another two, three days. When you see the Crown Prince the old
face will vanish forever.”

“Let’s have a look at the Hunters’ Hall now. Come.”

“That’s sheer waste, Amma. The Hall will be full of dust. You’ll spoil your nice
saree.”

“I don’t mind.”

“You’ll start to cough and sneeze. Remember all those people are coming
tomorrow.”

“Let them come. We’ll have to check the Hunters’ Hall right now. Hold the lamp
carefully. Guard the flame. Let it not go off when we are there.”

Manimekalai entered the Hunters’ Hall. The maid followed her with a lamp in

her hand. They were slowly looking around the large hall. Chandramathi
focussed on the lifeless animals above the lamp while Manimekalai’s eyes swept
across the hall occasionally looking down on the floor for any sign of recent
disturbance. She made a mental note of fresh foot prints on the mud floor.

“Amma! Look there.”

“What? Why are you shouting?”

“That monkey without a tail appeared to move a little.”

“Perhaps it is happy to see you, dear.”

“Why are you teasing me, Amma?”

“Didn’t you tease me that I had gone crazy and hallucinating images of men?”

“Perhaps you must have seen the same monkey’s face in the mirror. See, the
monkey is right opposite to the entrance of the hall. See, Amma, the monkey is
moving again.”

“No, it’s the shadow caused by your lamp. When the shadow moves it appears to
you as if the monkey is moving. Come let’s go. I don’t see anybody here.”

“Then, Amma, you must have seen only the monkey’s face in the mirror. Or else
it must be the face of that owl. The one sitting on the top. See how he stares at
us!”

“Why do you include me with you? The owl is bowled over by your beauty and
is staring at you.”

“Then what did you see in the mirror?”

“Do you think I am crazy? The same face which appears in my dreams appeared
in this mirror. After having seen that handsome face, I feel bad to see this
monkey and the owl. Come let’s go. Let me see if I can see the face again in the
mirror.”

The two girls retraced their steps and entered the personal chambers laid out for
the Junior Queen.

Vandhiya Thevan came out from behind the monkey without tail. He sneezed
two, three times to get out the dirt and dust that had gone into his system. He
then expressed his gratitude to the tailless monkey which had shielded him from
the ladies.

“O’ Monkey, may you live long! When that stupid maid compared my face to
yours, I was furious. I even thought of stepping out. Thank God, I changed my
mind at the last moment. If only you had not been here, what would have
happened to me? I would have been caught by those girls. Monkey, may you be
blessed.”

Even while saying these words a part of his mind reminded him that even if he
was caught by the girls nothing untoward would have happened. He had guessed
their identities. He could clearly hear their conversation. Manimekalai spoke in a
loud, clear voice. Didn’t she say about the face she saw in the dream and the one
she saw in the mirror? What was she talking about?

His friend Kandhanmaran had told him that he used to share stories about him
with his sister. Last time when he came to this Palace, Kandhanmaran had told
him that she was going to be married off to some groom of high stature. Perhaps
this crazy girl had not yet changed her mind. Oh My God!

There was no time to consider the feelings of that soft girl. He had to find a way
out of the dark chamber. If he used the lever in the shape of the elephant’s tusk it
opened the way to the ladies’ chambers. Now that way would not be useful for
his purpose. He knew very well that the lever to open a secret door from inside
would be different from the level used to open the door from outside. Now he
had to find out the exact levers. But before that he should know where the secret
passage was

He was staring at the wall for a long time. No secret passage was visible. The
light was not sufficient. Then he remembered seeing a crocodile near the place
where he entered this place. If only he went there and examined the wall perhaps
he might find a way out of this maze.

He went near the embalmed crocodile and felt the surrounding walls with his
hands. He could find nothing. As time passed he became more and more
anxious.

‘Oh My God’ Vandhiya Thevan shuddered. He was now trapped in the
underground dungeons. There was no way out but for the ladies’ chambers. Even
that was dangerous.

Perhaps Manimekalai might have a soft corner for him. But how could he
explain his presence there in the ladies chambers of Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace?

‘Can I say that my love for you brought me here? I could not remain without
seeing you. Will that not be a very cruel lie? Even if I harden my heart to tell that
kind of a lie will she believe me? And what was the guarantee that Manimekalai
will be alone in the chambers? If I am is caught amongst a group of palace girls?
If the news reaches Sambuvaraiyar, he won’t think twice before killing me.’

Vandhiya Thevan’s eyes looked at the embalmed crocodile lying on the floor. He
was furious. “Oh Crocodile, why are you keeping your mouth so widely open?”
He kicked the crocodile pretty hard. The crocodile moved a little. At the same
time a small gap opened up on the floor near the wall.

“Oh, you were the one blocking the way so far. You idiot crocodile! Why didn’t
you tell me earlier?”

Vandhiya Thevan bent down and moved the crocodile further. As the crocodile
moved, the hole near the wall became larger and larger. A flight of stairs became
visible.

Chapter 8 - Two Hands In The Dark

Vandhiya Thevan was awestruck by the way the secret passages and their
entrances and exits were planned in Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace. If a person not
familiar with those secret passages dared to venture into one of them, well, he
was as good as dead. Vandhiya Thevan was now half way down the steps and if
for any reason the crocodile is moved then he would be trapped in the hole. His
fate would be sealed.

So Vandhiya Thevan first made sure that the crocodile did not move on its own.
Only then did he place his feet on the steps in the passage.

‘Oh My God! I am now hearing the sound of footsteps from the other end. From
the place where I entered this tunnel. Who is coming? Is it Azhwarkkadian? Is he
coming for me? I should not let him come here now. He will be in trouble. No,
it’s just not one person coming. I can hear the footsteps of about five or six
people. Then it must be Idumban Kari and his partners.’

Vandhiya Thevan sprang from his place. The next moment he was hiding behind
the monkey without a tail.

‘Oh My God! I have kept the secret passage open. Will that make those people
suspicious? No way. Even when I came in the passage was open. It got closed on
its own only when I climbed up to the top-most step. In a way it’s better that the
passage is open. Yes, there I can see a head emerging from the hole. Yes, it is
Idumban Kari’s. He is now on the top most step. He is looking around. He has
one foot on the step below. Perhaps he does not want the hole to close on its own
while he is there.

Good Heavens! I see light on this side of the wall. The elephant fixed on the wall
has started to move. The door to the ladies’ chambers is open. Who is coming by
that way? Oh My God! Manimekalai is coming again. She is holding a lamp.

Idumbankari springs up from where he is standing. The hole through which he
emerged closes on its own. Idumbankari removes the piece of cloth and tries to
dust the embalmed tiger near him. Oh My God! How and when will this drama
end?’

Manimekalai lifted the lamp high and looked around. Her eyes rested on
Idumban Kari. There was an expression of surprise on her face. Idumban Kari
stopped dusting and looked back at the Kadambur Princess.

“Your Highness! At this time? What happened?”

“Is that you, Idumba? What are you doing here?”

“Your Highness, the royal guests might want to look at the Hunters’ Hall. I am
trying to keep the hall as clean as possible. Prince has issued orders to that effect
before he left for Kanchi.”

“Yes, Idumba. The Prince believes only you and me in the whole palace. I was
just checking the room we have got ready for the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. I
heard some noises from here. I thought you should be here. For who else knows
the secret passages of this Palace better than you, Idumba? How long have you
been working here, Idumba?”

“About thirty minutes, Your Highness. I have about another thirty minutes of
cleaning-work here. But Your Highness why did you come alone? What
happened to that chatterbox, Chandramathi?”

“I was worried about the noises coming from here. So I have sent her to fetch
my father. Now that I know that you are here I’ll stop her.”

Manimekalai lifted the lamp to study the change of expression in Idumban Kari’s
face. Then she looked at the monkey without a tail. She also saw the animal
making a slight movement as it did on an earlier occasion.

“You are right, Your Highness. The King has so much on his plate. You may
please retire for the day. I’ll take care of the work, Your Highness.”

Manimekalai retraced her steps to the chamber. The secret door closed.

Idumban Kari went near the face of the elephant and placed his ear on the wall.
Once he was sure that the other room was quiet he came back and opened the
hole. He went down the steps. His hip was at the floor level. He could hear an
owl hooting from inside the hole. Idumban Kari too hooted like an owl to return
the signal. Vandhiya Thevan could now hear the sound of footsteps approaching
the hole. Things started to move pretty fast after that.

A bat flew across the hall noisily fluttering its wings. Idumban Kari saw the bat.
The very next second the monkey without a tail fell on him. The fall was quite
sudden and the least expected. Idumban Kari lost his balance. His knees folded.

He was forced to go two steps down. He did not know what hit him. He tossed
his hands as if to get rid of something. His mouth was uttering some gibberish as
he was frantically waving his hands. Finally he found that the embalmed tail-less
monkey had fallen on him accidentally. He now regained his courage and tried to
restore the monkey to its original place.

Meanwhile what looked like a pair of human hands appeared from above the
monkey-figure and tried to push him further down. Idumbankari could not
believe his eyes. He was frightened. He looked up and down. He noticed that the
tail-less monkey had entered the hole head down. Half of the monkey’s body had
disappeared. And the door to that hole was closing in on the monkey. He was
now sure that what appeared as human hands must be his hallucination.

By that time, the others had come close. Ravidasan led the pack. “Hey, why did
you scream? You were talking some gibberish. Any danger? Do you want us to
go now?”

“No, no. Nothing. There are no dangers. As I was opening the door to the hole
this giant-size embalmed monkey fell on me. I was scared. Now this monkey is
blocking our way. Give me a few seconds. Let me move the monkey and clear
the way for us to go.”

Even now, Lady Fortune favoured Vandhiya Thevan. When Idumban Kari was in
the hole looking at the flying bat, Vandhiya Thevan pushed the tail-less monkey
on him. And then he hid his face behind the monkey and used his hands to push
him further down. And finally he moved the crocodile as well.

He did all these in a matter of seconds and ran back to the face of the elephant.
He got hold of the elephant’s tusks and turned them with all his might. An
opening appeared on the wall. But it was not as wide as the entrance from inside

the ladies’ chambers. This was much narrow. Probably there was a door within a
door. Vandhiya Thevan did not have the time to find out the way to open the
door fully. He had to enter that small opening before the crowd of conspirators
came to the Hunters’ Hall. Otherwise he could never escape from them.

So he decided to slide through the narrow passage. He squeezed himself into that
circular hole. His head, hands and half of his trunk went in. He could not
squeeze in the other half of his body. There was nothing to hold on to. At that
time the lamp in the room had been put off and darkness surrounded him.

Vandhiya Thevan shouted for help:

“Chandramathi! Chandramathi! Help! Please save me! I am dying.”

He heard a woman laughing aloud.

“Oh My God, Chandramathi are you here? What are you looking at? Why are
you not helping me? Is it fair? Is it good?”

“Your entering the ladies chambers by stealth is neither fair nor good.” The
woman’s voice was firm.

Vandhiya Thevan now realised that the voice belonged to Manimekalai. But he
feigned ignorance.

“Chandramathi, I came in here because you wanted me to come. People are
behind me. Please pull me in. Otherwise I’ll be killed.”

“Is Chandramathi so smart? Ok. Let her come. I’ll teach her a lesson as well.”

“Oh, then you must be Princess Manimekalai. Your Highness, I beg of you,
please forgive me. And save me from danger. I promise you I won’t indulge in
such acts again. May you be always blessed, Princess.”

Two slender hands reached for Vandhiya Thevan’s mighty shoulders. The hands
held the shoulders and then gently pulled him down to the floor of the ladies
chamber. The opening in the wall closed on its own.

“A hundred million thanks to you, Princess.”

“Your thanks can wait till you know what I am going to do to you.”

“Whatever you do is okay with me Your Highness. You have rescued me from
those damned killers. That’s more than enough for me. Having escaped death
from the hands of those heartless demons, to die at your beautiful hands is a
great blessing.”

“Oh My God! You talk like a warrior. Now tell me about the killers who are after
you. But before that let me have a look at your face.

“Why should you see my face, Your Highness? When you were looking at the
marble mirror a monkey’s face appeared from behind. And that face is mine,
Your Highness.”

Vandhiya Thevan could hear the sound of bangles and the sound of the Princess
laughing. When Vandhiya Thevan had stuck his head into the ladies chamber
earlier, Manimekalai had covered the lamp in the room. And now she removed
the cover. The lamp glowed again. When she saw Vandhiya Thevan’s face she
forgot herself.

A group of people were entering the Hunters’ Hall at the same time.

Chapter 9 - The Dog Barked

Manimekalai froze. Her eyes were fixed on Vandhiya Thevan’s face. Vandhiya
Thevan smiled.

What can I tell this girl? How can I get away from her?

At that time a voice called from a distance and broke Manimekalai’s trance.

“Amma, did you call me?”

“No. I didn’t.” Manimekalai shouted back.

Manimekalai went near the hole from which Vandhiya Thevan emerged. She
locked the door. She then signalled to Vandhiya Thevan to follow her and took
him to the other end of the room.

She suddenly turned back and asked him:

“Now is the time to tell the truth. You said Chandramathi asked you to come
here? Is that true?”

“Yes, Your Highness.”

“When and where did she see you?”

“Just a little while ago. I was standing behind the monkey. You saw the monkey
and then went back. After you turned back she told me, “Monkey, can you come
to my chambers? It’ll be easy for me to frighten away the unwanted guests.
Perhaps you didn’t hear her.”

Manimekalai smiled.

“If I had heard I would have blasted her.”

“Why are you angry with her, Princess? If my face closely resembles that of the
tail-less monkey, poor girl, what can Chandramathi do?”

“Your face is nowhere near that of the monkey. It’s far from that.”

“Perhaps as far as the owl hanging above the monkey.”

“Your face is neither that of the monkey, nor of the owl. But you are as naughty
as the monkey. At times you blink your eyes like an owl. Did you stick your
head out through this marble mirror a few minutes ago?”

“Yes, Your Highness. I did.”

“Then why did you retreat and close the door?”

“I saw an angel’s face very close to mine. I thought that the angel might be
scared if she saw my face. I lifted my hands from the elephant’s tusk. The door
closed on its own.”

“Do you know who that angel was?”

“I did not know at that time. And then I thought it over. I got her right.”

“What do you know about her?”

“The one I saw was no ordinary angel. In fact, I saw a Goddess whose feet are fit
to be worshipped by all the angels. The darling daughter of King Sambuvaraiyar,
the one and only Princess Manimekalai Devi. The only sister of my dearest
friend, Kandhanmaran.”

Manimekalai arched her eye-brows. She smiled. But it carried an expression of
hatred, fury and derision.

“Oh, is that so? Is my brother your dearest friend?”

“Do you doubt it, Devi? What is there to doubt? Do you remember my coming
here about four months ago? I even visited the ladies’ chambers to pay respect to
the senior queens of this palace. Have you forgotten that, Devi?”

“Oh, I remember. How can I forget that so soon? So you are then the great
Vallavaraiyan Vandhiya Thevan, the famed Prince of the Vaana clan.”

“Yes, Your Highness. I neither have a country to rule nor a Palace to live. And
yet I bear that high-sounding title “Araiyan” which in Tamil means the King.
Yes, Devi. That’s the name of our clan. And I am the poor man you are referring
to. At one time your brother used to talk a lot about you. That was when we
worked together as part of the security force guarding the banks of the North
Pennai River. I too had so many dreams, Your Highness. But then I lost them
all.”

A strange thought appeared in Manimekalai’s mind.

‘My brother Kandhanmaran said that this man tried to stab him. Why should he
do that? Was it because of me? Kandhanmaran must have said that Vandhiya
Thevan can’t dream of marrying me. Vandhiya Thevan must have been dejected
and disappointed. And he must have picked up fight with my brother.’

The thought filled her mind with a strange kind of pleasure. Manimekalai
struggled hard to mask that pleasure and express that as her fury.

“There is no need to remind me of the old stories. Tell me why you entered this
Palace by stealth. Don’t make me send for my father.”

“Didn’t I tell you, Devi? Some killers are after me. As I was running away from
them I saw a hole in the ground. I thought it was a secret passage. All my
escape-routes were sealed. I had to get into that secret passage. And that brought
me here.”

“Well, you are one of the bravest warriors I have ever seen. And I have seen
thousands. And have heard about millions. But never in my past have I heard
about a warrior who is great when it comes to fleeing the enemy. The legendary
Utharakumaran of Mahabharatha should take lessons from you. On fleeing from
the battle-front.”

Vandhiya Thevan bit his tongue. He had thought of Manimekalai as an imbecile.
The girl was quite sharp. She was making fun of him.

“Devi, they were seven or eight people. I am fighting them all alone. They are
armed to their necks. I don’t have any weapon with me. My spear was washed
away in floods at the Coleroon River.”

“In a way it’s good. That was a treacherous spear. It could stab a dear friend
from the back. It’s good that it was washed away in the floods.”

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked. Before he could think of a response
Manimekalai thundered:

“Now is the time to tell the truth. Why did you come here? You were running
away from your killers? Or have you come here to kill somebody?”

Vandhiya Thevan felt as if he had placed his foot on fire.

“OH MY GOD! SHIVA SHIVA! NARAYANA! I have come here to kill whom?
Do you think I’ll kill my dear friend’s darling sister? What for?”

“Who knows? I don’t know how you still manage to say “my dear friend”?
Didn’t you try to stab that dear friend on his back? Why? Perhaps you’ve come
here for a similar purpose now. To stab somebody on their back.”

“Oh My God! May the good heavens have some mercy on me! Did I stab
Kandhanmaran? If I were forced to do that I’ll rather cut my hands than doing
that meanest act of betrayal. Princess, who had the heart to utter those damned
lies?”

“Who else but my own brother? If somebody else had said that I would not have
believed it.”

“Did Kandhanmaran say that? Then I am really unfortunate. Somebody stabbed
him on his back and had ditched him near the walls of Thanjavur Fort. He was
unconscious. I lifted him up and carried him to Chendhan Amudhan’s hut. I
made sure that he recovered well. And now I have been amply rewarded for my
work. Princess, tell me this at least. Why should I kill my dear friend? Did he
offer any reason?”

“Yes, he did. You called me ugly. You had told him that the women in the
Thanjavur Palace are real beauties. Kandhanmaran was furious and he slapped

you. And you did not have the courage to fight him face to face. So you hid
behind him and stabbed him on his back. Tell me is that true or not?”

“Lie! Absolute falsehood! Before calling you ugly I would have plucked my
tongue out of my mouth. It was only your brother who insisted that I should
forget you forthwith.”

“But why?”

“He said that a number of reigning emperors are in the queue to marry you. So
he insisted that I should forget you.”

“And you listened to him, right?”

“Honestly I could not forget you altogether. From then on I’ve been seeing you
as my dear sister, Princess. Please take me to Kandhanmaran immediately. Or
else call him here. Let me know why he uttered such a big lie. If the thinks that
as the truth, I’ll change his mind. Please, Devi...”

“Whatever mission you started in Thanjavur you want to complete it here in
Kadambur, right?”

“I don’t get you, Devi.”

“You tried to kill him there. You didn’t succeed. So...”

“Oh My God! Do you think that I am such a fool to come to his own palace to
kill him?”

“Then why did you choose the secret passage?”

“Now please listen. My killers are still in the next room. You can hear the
footsteps and voices.”

“Why should they kill you?”

“They look like sorcerers. Perhaps they want to offer a human sacrifice. And
they have chosen me.”

“Oh, that’s why they identified somebody who has all the markings of Royal
blood.” Manimekalai laughed.

“That surprises me as well. Why should they come for somebody with the face
of a monkey and the eyes of an owl? After listening to you I have a doubt.
Perhaps my dear friend Kandhanmaran has given orders to them. Please take me
to your brother, Devi. He can either clear his doubts. Or else let him kill me with
his own hand. Why should he hire killers, Devi? Please call Kandhanmaran
immediately.”

“You need not be in such a great hurry. For Kandhanmaran is not in town.”

“Where is he?”

“He has gone to Kanchi to fetch the Crown Prince Karikalan. They will all be
here tomorrow night. Till then… you… “

“Till then you want me to stay here? No, Devi. That is not proper.”

“No. I never said that. The Junior Queen of Pazhuvur will come here shortly.
Then even air cannot enter this place without proper permission. You know
Pazhuvettaraiyar. If he sees you here he’ll simply hack you to death. Oh My
God, how the old man loves his wife!”

Manimekalai laughed.

Vandhiya Thevan now remembered the events that happened when
Pazhuvettaraiyar came to Kadambur earlier.

“Oh, is it so? Does Pazhuvettaraiyar love his young wife so much?”

“The whole world knows. Last time when they came here the old man did not
allow his Queen to visit us ladies in the palace. He is keeping her in his palm and
is taking excellent care of her. This time they are going to stay here for a few
days. And they have insisted on separate chambers for the Queen. Will the old
man let her see us...? I don’t know.”

“Then what should I do, Devi?”

“I am still thinking. Yes! My brother has a dedicated room for his weapons. I’ll
take you there. Kandhanmaran will come only tomorrow evening. You can stay
there till he comes. When he comes you can prove your side of the story.”

“No, Devi. That’s neither fair nor safe. It’s highly risky.”

“Why risky?”

“If Kandhanmaran asks how I reached that place…. …..”

“Tell him the truth.”

“When I said the truth even you did not believe me, Your Highness. Even when
my killers are in the next room you don’t believe my words.”

“Ok, let me verify it myself.”

“What are you going to verify, Your Highness?”

“I am going to the Hunters’ Hall and enquire the persons who are there. I want to
find out whether they have come to kill you or whether you brought them with
you.”

“Oh My God! They are all ruthless killers, Devi. And if you are caught alone
with them.... “

“What can they do to me in my own Palace? Have a look at this.”

Manimekalai pulled out a small foldable knife from her hip.

“Nobody can come near me. And even if they do, I have a hero like you by my
side.”

“But, Devi, I am unarmed now.”

“For the brave and skilful even a blade of grass can be a weapon. And your
name - Vallavaraiyan - hints about your skills. With weapons in hand even timid
girls can fight. Why do we need a warrior like you? You need not worry at all.
There is a person in the Hunters’ Hall who’s cleaning the place. He is our
servant. He could have brought the others to help him in his work, in which case
I must know them too. Let me find out why they have come here. Don’t stand
near the door. Can you see that grain repository? Please stand over there till I
come back. Will you?”

Manimekalai went to the door that led to the Hunters’ Hall and tried to open it.

Vandhiya Thevan walked fast towards the repository and hid himself. The doors
of the repository were open. He looked in. It did not look like a repository for
grains. There were steps. And on each step was a music instrument - the Veena,
the yaazh and the drums. He looked up. It appeared as if the steps reached up to
the ceiling.

By that time Manimekalai had entered the Hunters’ Hall.

Vandhiya Thevan was quite surprised by her courage. At first he was worried
about her safety. But then he consoled himself that she would be quite safe in her
own palace.

The door of the chamber opened and Chandramathi entered the hall. “Amma...
Amma… “

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked. He entered the room of musical instruments to
hide from Chandramathi.

“Amma, the people from Thanjavur have reached the gates of our Fort. The
Queen wants you there. She has sent me to fetch you, Amma.”

Chandramathi looked around and walked towards the door to the Hunters’ Hall
which was open.

From where she stood, she could have seen Vandhiya Thevan. So he climbed a
few steps up. His knees hit a Veena and there was a distinct sound. Vandhiya

Thevan was shocked and climbed a few more steps. His head hit the ceiling.
What a surprise! The ceiling which was a wooden plank moved up further.
Vandhiya Thevan grew suspicious and tried to move the wooden plank with his
hand. The plank yielded. And he could see the light of an open space. He could
hear some sounds at a distance. He could see stars at a distance. Vandhiya
Thevan’s heart jumped in joy.

He now removed the plank aside and climbed up. He now realised that he had
reached the terrace. He also remembered that when he visited the Palace a few
months ago he had slept exactly in that place enjoying the cool breeze. It was
here that he hid behind the pillars and listened to the deliberations of the
assembly of conspirators. Vandhiya Thevan moved the plank again and closed
the way through which he climbed up. Only then he realised that it was not easy
to locate that passage from the terrace. He did not have the luxury of time to
wonder how the passage had been perfectly planned. His first priority was
survival - to escape from the Palace unharmed. Lady Luck had been smiling at
him all the time. There was a good chance that she would continue to favour
him.

Vandhiya Thevan looked around. He could see flags and festoons all over the
Palace. This is how a Royal reception should be.

He walked on the terrace carefully looking in all the directions before taking
each step. The terrace was virtually deserted. Vandhiya Thevan thanked his stars
and started walking fast.

He reached the spot where he had slept for the night when he visited the Palace a
few months ago. From his position he could see the outer walls of the palace. He
could also see the huge yard inside the palace, the place where the Kuravai
Koothu happened at that time, the place where the conspirators had congregated.
But there was nobody in those places. Of course it did not require a genius to
know why.

The Palace gate was abuzz with activity. Hundreds of torches illuminated the
place. There were drums and other musical instruments playing at a high pitch.
People’s hailing sound pierced the sky. Pazhuvettaraiyar’s retinue had reached
the gates and the whole Palace was there to receive the visitors. That explained
the absence of people at the place he stood. He could not have got a better
opportunity to escape from danger. He could not have got such an ideal
opportunity either if he had come ten minutes earlier or ten minutes later.

Vandhiya Thevan walked to the spot where the conspirators had assembled. He
looked around. There was nobody. He then looked down. There was nobody
there. He saw the palace wall. There was nobody. But wait!

Oh My God! There is a human face appearing between the branches peering
over the wall. It looks like the face of Azhwarkkadian. No, no, that’s just a
hallucination! This is exactly the place where I saw his face when I came here
earlier. So my mind has deceived me once again. In a way that’s good. That’s the
best point to jump over the wall. I need to escape before the crowd comes into
the Palace after according a reception to the visiting dignitaries. But first I
should get into the yard. How am I going to do it? Well, I can see a thatched
shed in the yard. Perhaps they are going to have Kuravai Koothu or some other
show.

A large bamboo pole buried deep into the ground to support the temporary
auditorium stretched up to the terrace. Vandhiya Thevan jumped on to it and slid
down to the yard. He looked around. The place was still deserted. He could hear
the sound of anklets from the place where he stood before jumping down.

That must be Manimekalai. Oh My God! If I am caught by her, my fate is sealed.

Vandhiya Thevan ran across the open yard. He went near the wall and turned
back. He could see the figure of a lady over the terrace. But he was not sure
whether it was Manimekalai or Chandramathi. Whosoever it was, she would
have seen him running across the yard. She did not raise an alarm.

Whosoever it is, may she be blessed.

Vandhiya Thevan walked along the wall after blessing that woman. He reached
the spot from where Azhwarkkadian’s face had appeared. But how to scale the
wall? It was so high and was perfectly even. A rough, up and down surface
would have afforded a perfect grip for him to climb the wall. He then saw a few
bamboo poles lying on the ground. That must have been the surplus materials
brought for erecting the thatched shed. He quickly picked a long bamboo pole.
He made the pole lean on the wall. The pole was almost as high as the wall. Now
he could climb the pole and reach the top of the wall. But how would he make
the pole stand firm? What would happen if it slipped when he was half way up?
Then he would have a great fall. But there was no other way.

He tested the strength of the pole and started to climb. When he was half way up,
the pole started to hobble and waver.

If I fall now all the bones in my body would go for a toss. Suddenly the pole
became firm. It looked as if a hand from above was holding the pole tight. Thank
God, I’ve not become insane. Vandhiya Thevan continued to climb. When his
hands gripped the edge of the wall the pole slipped and fell down. The sound of
the pole hitting against the ground appeared like the sound of thunder.
Thankfully, the noise at the gate of the Fort was much higher. But the girl
standing on the terrace would not have missed the sound. Vandhiya Thevan
turned around to look at her. She was still standing in the same position.

Even while in the middle of danger his mischievous qualities had not left him.
He waved to the girl as if taking leave of her. He then started climbing down the
other side of the wall. Climbing down was not that difficult. The branches of the
trees nearby helped him.

When he thought of how he duped Manimekalai, he laughed out loud. He then
heard somebody laughing, as if echoing his laugh. His blood froze. His hands
started to tremble. He was just a few steps away from the ground and wanted to
jump. There was a dog ready to pounce on him. He had no time to think. He
could not climb up the wall again. He had to jump. But if he did, the dog would
surely have its pound of flesh.

Did he hear somebody laughing or was it the sound of the dog barking? Was the
dog sent by somebody who was hiding in the dark?

Was it more dangerous to climb up the wall or to climb down? Vandhiya Thevan
was in a dilemma. His legs were dangling in the air trying to escape the dog’s
mouth which was jumping higher and higher to catch them.

Chapter 10 - The Manhunt

Vandhiya Thevan was in a dilemma. Should he jump to the ground deftly
evading the dog’s mouth or should he scale up the wall again? He looked around
to see if anybody was hidden behind the trees. A white cloth seemed to move
behind one of the trees. He remembered having heard somebody laughing. If a
man was hidden in the bushes.... Would that be one man or many? To jump to
the ground without that information would be the greatest blunder. Even if he
managed to escape the dog’s mouth he was sure to be caught by the men.

He clearly remembered seeing Azhwarkkadian’s face over the wall when he was
on the terrace.

Perhaps that Vaishnavite has been bored of waiting at the Ayyanar temple. He
has come here and has set the dog after me. Well, why don’t I check that right
now? Why don’t I call him?

“Oh Vaishnavite! What’s this you are doing?”

He heard somebody laughing once again. That was not Azhwarkkadian’s voice.
Vandhiya Thevan now sure that the only way to survive was to scale up the wall
again and get back into the Palace. He could easily find a way to hide himself in
the elaborate festivities planned for receiving the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. And
then he would have to sweet talk Manimekalai into helping him go out. While
doing that he would have to win over the affection of Nandini as well. Nandini
had not betrayed him so far. There was no reason why she would do that now.

Vandhiya Thevan tried to retrace his steps. He was climbing up the wall. The
dog tried to jump higher and higher. He heard the sound of laughter once again.
A figure emerged from behind the tree with a spear in the hand. Vandhiya
Thevan knew that it was Devaralan, part of the conspiracy group. Devaralan
came near Vandhiya Thevan.

“Your stars are favourable, Young man. You always escape death at the nick of
time.”

“I know that. But tell me, why have you come to me again?”

“Only to tell you, to show you that you can’t escape from me this time.”

Devaralan aimed the spear at Vandhiya Thevan.

It was only then that Vandhiya Thevan realised that his life was in danger. How
can a man dangling on the wall fight with a person standing on firm ground and
that too when the latter was armed with a deadly spear? Well, in theory, he could
jump to the ground to escape the spear. But the hunting dog was waiting for its
pound of flesh.

“Devarala, beware! Remember the orders of your boss, the Junior Queen of
Pazhuvur. Didn’t your Queen issue orders not to harm me?”

Devaralan laughed like a devil.

“The Queen of Pazhuvur is not my boss. My boss is Bhadrakali, Durga
Parameswari. Yes, the Holy Mother alone is my boss.”

“She’s my Holy Mother too. My clan worships her. She is our presiding deity. It
was only because of Her grace that I could escape from a burning ship. If you try
to touch me, your Holy Mother will destroy you!”

“If you are really a devotee of Durga Parameswari you should help me now. If
you do, I won’t harm you.”

“What do you want me to do? But before that, send this damned dog away.”

“I saw a Vaishnava fanatic somewhere around here. If you help me to capture
him, I’ll set you free.”

“Why should you capture him?”

“I have vowed to sacrifice a Vaishnava fanatic to Durga Devi.”

Precisely at that time the shrub that Vandhiya Thevan was holding tight for his
balance, came off. Vandhiya Thevan was now exploring the possibilities of
directly falling on Devaralan in order to escape his spear.

“That Vaishnavite is my dear friend. I’ll never betray him. Why don’t you
sacrifice me in his place?”

“Then be a victim to my spear.” Devaralan lifted the spear and aimed at
Vandhiya Thevan.

Vandhiya Thevan let the shrub go and jumped under the spear holding its edge.
And fell down in the process. Devaralan was shocked. Before he could come out
of the shock and lift the spear again, a figure armed with a heavy stick came
behind him and hit his head with great force. Devaralan now fell on Vandhiya
Thevan.

The dog pounced on the person who had attacked its master. Azhwarkkadian
was prepared for that as well. He pulled off the cloth above his waist and
covered the dog’s face. For a few seconds the dog went blind. Azhwarkkadian
pulled out a creeper for a make-shift dog chain. With that creeper he bound the
dog to a tree.

Meanwhile Vandhiya Thevan pushed Devaralan from him and stood up. A single
blow from the Vaishnavite was more than enough to render Devaralan
unconscious. Vandhiya Thevan and Azhwarkkadian foraged for some more
creepers. They used them to bind Devaralan’s limbs. Vandhiya Thevan took the
spear and Azhwarkkadian, his stick. They left the place.

Except for the gates all the other sides of Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace were
surrounded by thick forest. If somebody accidentally entered these forests it was
very difficult to come out of them. The two men knew this very well and hence
kept walking close to the walls of the Palace.

Azhwarkkadian shouted at Vandhiya Thevan.

“I thought you are smart.”

“Are you referring to my entering that tunnel? Do you know how many things I
have found out because of that?”

“No, I am not talking about that. When that crook Devaralan asked you ‘Will
you help me capture that Vaishnavite?’ you should have said a big “YES”. Why
did you refuse and get caught?”

“All because of the company I keep!”

“Are you alluding to me? Have I ever told you to commit these blunders? I don’t
think so.”

“I am not referring to you. I am referring to Ponniyin Selvan. After spending
time with him, I don’t have the heart to tell lies.”

“Not even to save your life? Have you become such a true soul?”

“That’s not the only reason. I know very well that you were hiding somewhere
around here. Suppose I were to tell Devaralan that, I’d betray you and suppose
you heard that and suppose you believed that... I don’t think you would have
helped me.”

“You are very smart, Young Man. There is no doubt about it. Honestly I was
anxious to know what answer you were going to give to that difficult question.”

“See, my predictions have become true. I knew you’d doubt anything and
anybody. That apart, whatever the benefits I may get, I would never betray a true
friend. But you promised to wait for me at Ayyanar Temple. How did you come
here? If I had returned through that tunnel I’d have missed seeing you there in
the temple.”

“If you had chosen to return by that tunnel you would not have come out alive.
Soon after you went in, the conspirators followed suit. I know you are smart. So
I thought you’d choose some other way to come out. I even thought that you
might choose to jump the wall here.”

“Don’t tell me that you came here fully knowing that I’d choose this exact place
to appear!”

“No, that’s not the only reason. The conspirators left Devaralan to guard the
entrance of the Ayyanar Temple. They wanted to make sure that nobody is in the
temple when they came out of the tunnel. So they had some peculiar signal that I
did not know. I thought everyone had entered the tunnel and was also worried
that you were caught inside the tunnel. I also wanted to know how to open the
tunnel from outside. So I went to the temple’s altar and tried to move it. I heard
some footsteps and looked around. Devaralan was coming towards me with a
spear. The conspirators had issued orders to kill me wherever and whenever I am
seen.

I was not armed. I had no alternative than to flee. I was running through a dense
forest. He could not catch me. After some time I knew that I had lost him. I
thought of taking the high road. There was a small hut at a distance. A small oil

lamp was the only source of light in the vicinity. I decided to go to the hut to ask
for directions to the high road. Thank God I looked at the house carefully! I
noticed this devil Devaralan standing there. A woman and a dog were near him.
Devaralan spoke something to the woman and then went off along with the dog.
The dog sensed my presence and barked in my direction. I was in danger. I
abandoned the idea of taking the high road and ran back into the forest.

As the dog was continually barking I could guess where the conspirators were
going. As I was running away from danger my brain was hyper active. I knew it
was impossible to stay in the forest all night. They will somehow find me. And
that will be the end of me. At the same it will not be easy to manage Devaralan
who was armed with a spear and a hunting dog armed with strong teeth.

I happened to see the wall of this great building. I thought that if I could manage
to scale the wall and jump into the building then I can somehow manage to
escape from the conspirators. And I started climbing up the wall. When I was on
top I saw you running across the terrace. I guessed that you will try to come out
the Palace by scaling up the wall. So I jumped down on the other side. I was sure
that if we joined hands we can manage Devaralan and the dog.

I heard the sound of barking and I climbed up a tree. Devaralan and the dog
came near the tree. Devaralan saw you getting down the palace wall. He took the
dog with him and went running towards you. And you know what happened
after that.

“Vaishnava, what are your views on the power of destiny?”

“What’s this question? Why should you talk about destiny all of a sudden?”

“People say that the moment a person is born Lord Brahma, the Creator, writes
his entire life history on his head. Do you believe that?”

“No. I don’t believe in destiny. If destiny is all-powerful then there will be no
point in our devotion to God. Do you know what our Azhwars have said about
it…? “

“Let the Azhwars wait. I now have complete faith in destiny. Everything is preordained. Otherwise I would not have come out of the palace alive.”

“Young man, you escaped not because of your fate but because of your
intelligence.”

“No way! My intelligence led me to unknown dangers. It was my fate which
rescued me.”

They had come out of the forest by then. They could see the front entrance of the
Kadambur Palace. The place was bustling with activity. The Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s retinue consisting of elephants, horses and infantry had just
reached the Palace gates. Sambuvaraiyar and his retinue were waiting at the
heavily decorated entrance to receive the visitor.

Hundreds of torches had converted night into day. A wide variety of drums and
horns were being played.

Azhwarkkadian grabbed Vandhiya Thevan’s hand. “Come let’s get out of here

before somebody sees us.”

“Nobody can recognise us. Even if they do my destiny will save me. Should we
not see the glorious sight of the Pazhuvettaraiyar getting down from his
elephant?”

“Are you interested only in that?”

“I also want to know whether Nandini has come with him in the elephant or in a
closed palanquin.”

“Don’t think fate will favour you always. At times it will come in the form of a
seductive witch and upset your life-cart.”

“I can’t be so easily seduced, Vaishnava. There are others who’ll fall for her
charms. Not me.”

The majestic elephant came to a stop at the Palace gate. The Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar got down from the pachyderm. Soon the Junior Queen of
Pazhuvur, Nandini Devi followed suit.

“Oh! This time he has openly taken the queen along with him. She did not come
in a closed palanquin.”

There was a tinge of sarcasm in his voice.

“I wanted to know only that. Come, let’s go.”

Vandhiya Thevan moved back. This time Azhwarkkadian was not in a hurry. He
stood in the same place. He was looking at Nandini without batting his eye-lids.
It may have been a mere coincidence or the mind-powers of the Vaishnavite Nandini turned to look at him.

Azhwarkkadian’s face was looking at her from the midst of dark trees. The
moment she saw his face she became pale. Pazhuvettaraiyar did not fail to notice
the sudden change in his wife’s face. He also looked in the same direction. He
saw two figures hiding behind the dark shadow cast by the trees.

He whispered something into the ears of Sambuvaraiyar. Sambuvaraiyar barked
orders to two of his men.

Pazhuvettaraiyar and Nandini entered the palace amidst great fanfare.

At the same time two horsemen entered the forest just beyond the palace walls.
They had to struggle hard to lead their horses into the dark forest. They rode on
for a long distance and had reached the clearing beyond the forest. Still they
could not find anybody

“There’s nobody in the forest. It’s nothing but the hallucination of the old man.”

At that time they heard the howling of a dog.

“Do you know when a dog will howl?” - One of the horsemen asked.

“When it sees a devil or a ghost or some supernatural apparition.”

“Perhaps you look like a devil to the dog.”

“No, brother. You look like a ghost.”

They heard a devilish laughter from above. They looked up. There were two
ghosts sitting right above the two men in the tree. The two ghosts extended their
hands and slapped the two soldiers on their cheeks. The ghosts then placed their
hands on the necks of horsemen and pushed them off their horses.

Then those naughty ghosts mounted the horses and crossed the forest and rode
fast in the clearing.

Chapter 11 - Is He A Friend Or A Traitor?

The Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan, his friends and his retinue were crossing
the beautiful place where River Manimutha merged with River Vellaru. They
were discussing the hospitality accorded to them at their last place of visit Thirumudhukunram. They were also discussing the temple renovation work
under progress in that village.

“I appreciate what Saint Sundaramurthy did at Thirumudhukunram.” Parthibendran opened a conversation.

“What did he do?” The Crown Prince was curious.

“The Saint refused to sing praises of an old woman.”

“What was that? Tell me the whole story.”

Parthibendran started a long narration.

As a part of his pilgrimage the venerated saint Sundaramurthy Nayanar visited a
place called Thirumudhukunram presently known as Virudhachalam. The
priests of the temple welcomed him and showed him around the temple.

“Your Holiness, we entreat you. Please compose some songs on our Lord and
Goddess. We’ll deem it a great honour.”

They pleaded with him.

“Let’s see. But tell me what the name of your Lord is?” Sundaramurthy asked.

The word Thirumudhukunram had a connection with old age. So the Lord of the
place was accordingly named as Virthagireeswarar, which literally meant the
Old Lord.

The Saint’s face fell. ‘Should I sing about an old man?’ He thought.

“That’s okay. What’s the name of the Goddess?”

“Viruthagireeswari.”

The word denoted an old Goddess.

“You made my God an old man. Ok, let that be. Why have you made my Holy
Mother also an old woman?”

The priests did not know how to respond.

“No, I won’t sing about an old man and his old lady.” The Saint walked out of
the temple in apparent fury.

Now the priests were worried. If somebody as great as Sundaramurthy Nayanar
did not sing on their deities then their temple would not be considered holy
enough for pilgrimage. So they installed another statue of the Goddess and this
time carefully named her as Balambikai, which meant a young woman.

Having done that they ran to Sundaramurthy and told him about the
developments begging him to come to their village and sing on their young
Goddess.

Sundaramurthy relented. He went back to their village and sang a set of ten
songs, called a padhikam in Tamil, on the young Goddess.

Adithya Karikalan virtually rolled in laughter after hearing the story.

“I think a poet would have told the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar similar to what the
Saint told the priests. He would have refused to sing the praises of the old man
and his old wife. Perhaps that was the motivation for the old man to marry a
young Nandini.”

Parthibendran and Kandhanmaran burst out into laughter. They laughed so much
that at one time it appeared as if they were going to fall off from their horses.

Parthibendran gathered himself to talk some philosophy.

“I don’t know why God created old age. He should have let us be young till our
destined time of death. That would have made our lives a lot easier.”

“Whatever may be God’s law, to attain old age or not is in our hands.” The
Crown Prince retorted.

“I don’t understand, Prince.” - Kandhanmaran questioned.

“Do we think of the legendary Abhimanyu and Aravan of Mahabharata as old
men?”

The other two were silent. They knew that those two heroes died pretty young.

“In the art gallery attached to the Thanjavur Palace we have the paintings of all
my ancestors. Vijayalaya Chozha, Adithya Chozha and Emperor Paranthaka
appear as old men. But my grandfather’s brother Rajadithya appears as a man in
the prime of his youth. Do you know the reason? He died young. So in a way he
was blessed with immortal youth. And people know him only as a young man. I
don’t know how many of us will have that blessing.”

The other two did not like his words. They remained silent.

“Why have you become silent? Are you so afraid of death? If this body goes

away we’ll get another. Why should we fear death? If only my friend Vandhiya
Thevan were here he will happily endorse my opinion. It is very rare to find
somebody as enthusiastic as Vandhiya Thevan. Even if you put him at the door
of death he will still be laughing.”

They saw two horses coming in the opposite direction. The horses were
galloping very fast creating a cloud of dust as they moved. And in a flash the
horses had come near them. The way the horses rode, it appeared as if they
might go past them without caring to pay respects to the Crown Prince of the
Chozha Kingdom. Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran were eager to know who
those arrogant horse-riders were. They got ready to block the riders by wielding
their spears across the road. But the horses were stopped at a short distance from
them.

Vandhiya Thevan and Azhwarkkadian dismounted. The Crown Prince was
ecstatic on seeing Vandhiya Thevan. He threw all protocol to winds. He jumped
from his horse and went towards Vandhiya Thevan to hold him in a tight hug.

“Thambi, you’ll live a hundred years and more. Just a second ago I was talking
about you.”

Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran were burning in jealousy at this sudden show
of affection. They moved their horses a little away from the Crown Prince.

They saw a few more horses coming at a distance. Those horses too stopped near
them. Kandhanmaran noticed that the horse riders were from his place,
Kadambur. He went near them and made enquiries.

He then came to Adithya Karikalan.

“Prince, this Vandhiya Thevan is your friend. He was my friend too, once upon a
time. But I have to level grave charges against him. He is a traitor. He stabbed
me in the back. So, Your Highness, it is my bounden duty to advise you to be
very careful with this man.”

Chapter 12 - The Broken Spear

Kandhanmaran levelled charges against his friend Vandhiya Thevan. Adithya
Karikalan laughed out loud.

“You mean to say that this Vandhiya Thevan stabbed you on your back,
Kandhanmaran? But why did you show your back to him?”

The Crown Prince laughed again.

The dark face of Kandhanmaran went red with anger. His eyes became red and
his lips quivered.

“Prince, do you consider this a laughing matter?”

“Kandhamara! Are you saying that I should not laugh? Laughter is a boon given
by God exclusively to human beings. The cow can’t laugh. Nor can the sheep.
The horse or the lion can’t laugh. Even monkeys who love to play mischief all
the time can’t laugh. Only human beings can laugh. Then why do you want to
stop my laugh? Do you know my friend that it’s aeons since I had a hearty
laugh? I am surprised by the sound of my own laughter. And you are telling me
not to laugh.”

“Prince, Your happiness only makes me happier. But please don’t think that I
showed my back to this all-time great warrior. At the most unexpected moment

hiding behind my back he stabbed me. It was because of the grace of my Holy
Mother, Durga Devi and thanks to the kindness of Nandini Devi that I am alive
today. I entreat you to please enquire into this blatant act of betrayal and render
justice to me. Or at least please give me powers to punish him.”

“My dear friend, please wait. Let me enquire into your charges. I’ll see to it that
you get justice. Nobody who has sought justice from a member of the great
Sembian clan has returned empty-handed. One of the earliest kings of our clan,
Emperor Sibi, cut his flesh in order to save a dove from the clutches of an eagle.
Manuneethi Chozhan, another King in our dynasty, sacrificed his own son in
order to right the wrong done to a cow. You are not inferior to a dove or a cow.
Justice will not be denied to you... But you will have to be patient till I finish my
enquiry.

“Vandhiya Theva, before you render an account of your travel, you should
answer the charge levelled against you by Kandhanmaran. What is your defence
for this grave charge? Did you really stab him on his back? And if you did, why
did you do that cowardly act of betrayal which is quite unbecoming of a warrior
of your stature?”

“Prince, I did not stab this warrior. Stabbing on the back.... I cannot even think
of that, Prince. Nor did I hide myself in order to do that act of cowardice. I saw
him bleeding and unconscious. I found him stabbed in the back. I bore him on
my shoulders and went all the way to Chendhan Amudhan’s house to save him.
But I now regret my decision of having saved his life. I regret that I did not kill
him by stabbing him on his chest. I am sorry, Your Highness, I let my love for a
friend take precedence over loyalty to my King. He accused me of having
betrayed a friend. But this man has not only betrayed his friend but his Master as
well. Ask him where did that back-stabbing incident happen and under what
circumstances. Ask him who he secretly brought to the Thanjavur Palace
through the secret tunnel. Ask him whom did he see in the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s treasury. Ask him what happened at the Kadambur Palace on
the 18th day of Adi, the day celebrated as Adi Perukku in Tamilnadu. Ask him

who came in the closed palanquin to Kadambur Palace on that day.”

Kandhanmaran trembled. He could not speak clearly. “Stop talking rubbish, lowborn worthless idiot. Otherwise you’ll become a prey to my spear!”

Kandhanmaran took out his spear.

Adithya Karikalan was surprised by this sudden display of emotions. He grabbed
the spear from Kandhanmaran. And then with his iron hands tried to bend the
spear. It broke. The Crown Prince threw away the two pieces of the broken
spear.

“BEWARE! I CAN’T TOLERATE MY FRIENDS FIGHTING IN MY
PRESENCE. PARTHIBENDRA IF ANY OF THESE TWO WIELD A SPEAR
OR A SWORD TO ATTACK THE OTHER, IT’S YOUR RESPONSIBILITY
TO ARREST THEM.”

Vandhiya Thevan pulled out his sword and gave it to Parthibendran who
reluctantly got it from him.

“Kandhamara, Vandhiya Thevan has answered your charges. I’ll take my time to
verify the truth in his statements and pronounce my judgment. Meanwhile are
you going to answer his questions now?”

Kandhanmaran was in a fix. “Your Highness I am under an oath not to disclose
or discuss those matters.”

Parthibendran intervened.

“Your Highness, judging from the way these people trade charges I am afraid
that the problem centres around a woman. It will be better if you enquire them
separately.”

“You are right, Parthiba. I too thought so. All the three of you have fallen in the
net of seduction cast by the Pazhuvur Queen. That explains your urgency to
destroy each other.”

Parthibendran’s face fell. Yet he wanted to fire his salvos against Vandhiya
Thevan.

“Your Highness, I presume that today you’ve taken a vow to take serious matters
quite lightly and make fun of them. Let that be so. Please give me a chance to
explain my side, Your Highness. I have my own doubts on Vandhiya Thevan. I’ll
share only the important ones with you. Your dear brother jumped into the sea
only to save this man from a burning ship. And we never saw Ponniyin Selvan
after that. But this man here is as strong as ever. As hale and healthy as he was
when he was caught in the ship. And has suddenly surfaced here. Ask him what
happened to your brother. If your brother was drowned in the sea then this man
is fully responsible for that.”

Karikalan turned to Vandhiya Thevan - “What’s your answer for this?”

“Before I answer his charge let him answer my question. It was this man who

took Ponniyin Selvan on his ship. Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar and
Lankan General Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari had advised Ponniyin Selvan not to
move out of Lanka. But Ponniyin Selvan, out of love and respect for his elder
brother, bowed down to his request. He got into this man’s ship. And it was the
responsibility of this man to deliver Ponniyin Selvan safely into your hands.
Why didn’t he do that? When Ponniyin Selvan jumped in the middle of the sea,
why this man remained a silent spectator? Why did not he prevent the Prince
from jumping into the sea?

“I am a poor man, Your Highness. I am an orphan, Your Highness. And yet
Ponniyin Selvan risked his life to save me. This man Parthibendran is a
renowned warrior of the Pallava clan. He had a duty to protect the life of our
Prince. Ask him why didn’t he or his men jump into the sea to save Ponniyin
Selvan?”

Parthibendran was furious. His hands and lips quivered.

“Prince, this fool is now accusing me. He might even say that it was I who killed
the Prince. I can’t bear this nonsense.”

Karikalan looked deeply into his eyes.

“Parthiba, didn’t I tell earlier? You, my dear friends, have become sworn
enemies of each other. I am not blaming you. It’s the powers of the Pazhuvur
Queen. I have felt those powers myself. Parthiba and Kandhanmaran, you mount
on your horses and ride slowly before us. Let me listen to the details of Vandhiya
Thevan’s travels. We’ll be following you. I’ll enquire into your charges and find
out the truth. But remember one thing. You three have to be friends. There’s
nothing which can bring greater sorrow to me than you three fighting with each
other.”

Parthibendra Pallavan and Kandhanmaran reluctantly mounted on their
respective horses and started riding forward.

Azhwarkkadian came near Vandhiya Thevan and whispered into his ears:

“You have become very smart. You did not tell the truth. Nor did you lie. But
you escaped from them.”

Adithya Karikalan saw Azhwarkkadian only at that time.

“Who is this? His face looks familiar to me.”

“Yes, Your Highness. You have seen me a few years ago.”

“Even your voice is familiar.”

“Yes, Prince. You heard my voice at an important moment three years ago.”

A black shadow spread across the face of the Crown Prince.

“Important moment … .. … Three years back... What was that... Did I hear this

voice when I was searching for the enemy in an island of the Vaigai River?”

“Yes, Your Highness. That voice was mine. It was I who told you about the
enemy’s hiding place. I was hiding behind a tree when I spoke to you.”

“What a horrible day it was! I was in a state of murderous frenzy. Even now if I
think of that day, my body shivers. Vaishnavite, why were you hiding in the
forest on that day? Why didn’t you appear before me at that time?”

“Your Highness just spoke about your murderous frenzy. You were killing
everyone who came on your way. And I wanted to live for some more time.”

“Is that the only reason? I shouted several times requesting the disembodied
voice to manifest before me. Even then you did not come.”

“Because I did not want to earn the fury of my adopted sister who is at present
the Queen of Pazhuvur.”

“And you wanted me to earn her fury, right? Villain!”

Karikalan unsheathed his sword. Vandhiya Thevan was afraid. He was sure that
Azhwarkkadian would be killed. He told the Crown Prince in a very soft voice.

“Your Highness, this man has come from the Chief Minister. He has got a
message for you. Please get your message before punishing him.”

“What’s the use in punishing him? What’s the use in punishing anybody for that
matter?”

Karikalan put back the sword in its sheath.

Unlike Vandhiya Thevan, Azhwarkkadian was unfazed by Karikalan’s anger. He
spoke to him with a strange smile on his face.

“Your Highness, I know you’ll direct your anger towards me. That was why I
avoided meeting you till now. My sister too is still angry with me. She refuses to
see me now. But I now learn that she is no longer angry with you. You came to
the feast at Kadambur Palace only after seeing her letter. Am I right, Your
Highness?”

“Scoundrel! Wicked Vaishnava! How the hell do you know?”

“I work for the Chief Minister. Nothing can happen in the Chozha Empire
without his knowledge.”

“One day or other I’ll banish Anbil Aniruddha Brahmarayar and you from the
Chozha Kingdom. Now you two mount on your horses. And ride on either side
of me. Let’s talk as we go. “

Chapter 13 - The Secret in Manimekalai’s Heart

Nandini was reclining on a bed made of the softest feathers. She was in the
specially decorated chamber at the Kadambur Palace. Nandini was draped in
luxurious silks. She wore the finest jewels. The beauty on her face was well
beyond the reach of any known language. Her eyes were half-closed. She was
indulging in her most favourite pastime - day-dreaming. Whenever her eyes
opened fully, rays of lightning flashed from her large, beautiful eyes. On the
surface it appeared if she was dozing; but her mind was hyper-active.

If somebody looked deep into her half-closed eyes they would find that they
focused on the source of incense smoke. A mud pot was holding the incense
powder. Perfumed smoke came out of the pot and went up in circles and then
vanished into thin air. Nobody knew what Nandini saw in the weird shapes
caused by the smoke.

She let out a long sigh. Her pearly lips murmured:

“All my dreams have evaporated like the smoky incense circles. The smoke at
least leaves a pleasant smell behind. My dreams will leave behind nothing but
pain, grief, humiliation and disgrace.”

“Devi, Devi... May I come in?”

Nandini heard the soft voice of Manimekalai.

“Please come. Why should you ask my permission to enter a room in your own
Palace?”

Manimekalai gently opened the door and walked in. It was true that she just
walked. But with her face glowing with zeal and enthusiasm in her steps and in
the movement of her hands, it appeared as if she was dancing her way into the
room.

Nandini sat up. She pointed out to the ivory seat near her bed to Manimekalai.

Manimekalai sat down.

“Devi, my brother has taught me how I should behave in your presence. He has
spoken a lot about the culture of the Southerners. Very specifically he has told
me that I should not enter anybody’s room without asking their permission first.”

“Let the Southerners and their culture go to hell. Forget whatever your brother
has taught you. And yes, don’t call me Devi or Queen. Never! Call me, Akka.”

“Akka! Akka! Sounds very sweet! I hope you won’t mind my disturbing you
here quite often.”

“Yes, it’ll be a disturbance if you come every now and then. Instead if you opt to
stay here, there won’t be any disturbance at all.”

Nandini’s smile was quite seductive. Manimekalai was bowled over by that
smile. For a while she was staring at Nandini’s beautiful face.

“I have never seen somebody half as beautiful as you, Akka. Not even in
paintings.”

“Oh My God! Please don’t fall in love with me. Already the whole town is
calling me a “Mayamohini” meaning the seducing witch. Any man who comes
near me falls for me. That’s the charge against me. I don’t want you to add to my
charges.”

“Akka, if only I hear somebody talking like that I’ll cut off their tongues.”

“There’s no point in blaming the whole town, Manimekalai. See I am married to
an old man. That makes their tongues wag.”

Manimekalai’s face fell.

“Yes, Akka. I and my brother feel sorry about it. But that can never give
anybody any right to talk ill of you.”

“Let them talk, Manimekalai. Even our Holy Mother Seetha Devi was not spared
from such gossip. But that’s not a loss to Seetha Devi. Ok, let’s not worry about
my problems. Now tell me about you.”

“What’s there to tell, Akka?”

“Cheat! Didn’t you tell me in the evening that you’d reveal what’s in your
heart?”

Nandini gently spanked Manimekalai’s cheeks.

“Akka, I want to be with you for all my life. If they organise a Swayamvar for
me and give me the liberty to choose my life-partner and if women are allowed
to marry women, then I’ll garland you as my husband, Akka.”

“Not even a whole day has passed since we met. And you have already started to
talk like this. Well… I am happy in a way. I was longing for a dear friend like
you for many, many years. The daughter’s of the Chieftains of Chozha Kingdom
favour that devil in Pazhaiyaarai. I’ve at least got you. But whatever you said a
short while ago can’t happen at all. A woman marrying a woman has never
happened in this world. You’ll have to marry a man. You have no other option.”

“What if I remain a virgin all my life, Akka?”

“No, dear. The world won’t let you remain a virgin; neither your father nor your
brother. They won’t rest till they marry you off to some man. Tell me who you
want to marry, given a choice.”

“Please give me some names, Akka. I’ll choose from them.”

“Ok. Will you marry Prince Madhuranthakan known for his devotion to Lord
Shiva? Or marry the Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan noted for his great acts of
valour?”

Manimekalai appeared to have been lost in thoughts and suddenly burst out
laughing.

“Why are you laughing, girl? Do you think that I am making fun of you? Your
brother asked me to come here particularly to settle that issue. Adithya Karikalan
might come here anytime. Your brother will be coming along with him. I have
given a promise to your brother that I’d tell him what’s in your heart.”

“Even I do not know what’s there in my heart, Akka. What can I do?”

“Tell me at least why you laughed.”

“As soon as you mentioned Madhuranthakan’s name, something came to my
mind. Four months ago he came here. He travelled in the closed palanquin in
which you usually travel. We at the ladies’ chambers did not know this secret
switch-over arrangement. We thought you had come in that palanquin. “Why
hasn’t the Pazhuvur Queen visited the ladies’ chambers yet?” - we were asking
one another. Akka, didn’t you say a little while ago that a woman cannot marry
another woman? My marrying Madhuranthakan would be a woman marrying a
woman.”

Nandini smiled.

“Yes, I too thought that you won’t like Madhuranthakan. I told this to your
brother. Madhuranthakan is already married to my brother-in-law’s daughter.
She’s a very arrogant woman. You can’t live with her even for a single day. Then
it means that you have lost your heart to Prince Karikalan.”

“No, Akka. I won’t say that. I have not seen him at all. How can I lose my heart
to him?”

“Dear, women born in Royal families do not have the luxury of seeing the man
before losing their hearts to him. Have you not heard in stories and epics about
women who have lost their hearts to men after seeing them in paintings and after
hearing about their accomplishments?”

“You are right, Akka. I too have heard. I have heard that Adithya Karikalan is
one of the greatest warriors of our Kingdom and that his fame has spread all over
the world. Akka, is it true that he cut off Veerapandiyan’s head in a single
stroke?”

Manimekalai failed to notice the terrifying change of expression on Nandini’s
face. Nandini looked away for a few seconds and then turned over to
Manimekalai. By that time her face had resumed its usual seductive charm.

“Manimekalai, do you think that beheading a person in a single stroke is an act
of valour? Isn’t that a terribly gruesome act?”

“I don’t understand, Akka. Is it not valour to cut the head of the enemy? How
can it be gruesome?”

“Imagine a situation like this. Somebody is dear to you. His enemy has come to
kill him. Think of your brother. Or, of the person, your beloved whom you want
to marry. And think of that person lying in bed. At that time somebody comes
with a drawn sword to kill him. Will you praise the valour of the aggressor?”

Manimekalai thought for a while.

“A strange question, Akka. Allow me to explain what appears in my little brain.
If I am in that kind of a situation I won’t be a silent spectator, Akka. I’ll grab the
sword from the hands of the killer and kill him with his sword.”

Nandini hugged Manimekalai.

“A very apt reply, my dear. I should now make sure that such an intelligent
woman like you should get the right husband. I doubt even Adithya Karikalan
will be a right match to you, my dear.”

“I think so too, Akka. After knowing about Karikalan, I am only afraid of him.
Can I tell you what’s there in my heart?”

Chapter 14 - Will Her Dream Come True?

Nandini held Manimekalai’s chin and lifted her face. She tried to look into her
eyes which had blossomed fully in happiness.

“Dear, its better that you do not open up your heart to me. We have hardly met.
Not even a whole day has passed since we came to know each other. You should
reveal what’s in your heart only to your old friends and not to strangers like me.”

“No, Akka. For me it seems that I have known you for ages. My heart is keen on
sharing those things with you which I have not shared with anybody else. I feel I
am now bold enough to seek favours from you which I have not sought from
anyone.”

“Then go ahead, my dear. Ask whatever you want.”

“I have read about the concept of “apparition” in stories. Can it happen in real
life? When somebody is not physically before us can we feel the person’s
presence?”

“It happens at times. If our love for someone is so intense we can feel the
person’s presence even though he may not be there. Paradoxically that happens
even if our hatred for a person is intense. Haven’t you heard of Lord Krishna’s
stories? You might have watched the plays as well. Kamsa hated Krishna. And
he could see Krishna everywhere. He used to throw knives at the apparitions he
saw and was disappointed every time. A milkmaid by name Nappinnai loved
Krishna. She used to see him everywhere. She would see the Lord in the pillars,

in the trees and even in the river. She would madly want to hug the Lord and
would be disappointed. Now tell me Manimekalai, which Krishna seduced you
like that?”

“Akka, I saw him for the first time about four months ago. Even before that, my
brother used to speak about him. I never saw him at that time. But after seeing
him once, his form used to visit me in my dreams. Even during daytime I could
see him standing before me.”

“And you saw that magician’s apparition yesterday?”

“You are right, Akka. But how did you know?”

“Didn’t anybody tell you that I have magical powers?”

“Yes, they have. But is it true, Akka?”

“You can test me. Well, I’ll use my powers of magic to tell you which handsome
prince stole your heart. “

“Come on, Akka! Please! I am too shy to tell his name.”

Nandini closed her eyes for a while and then opened them again.

“The man who heartlessly stole your heart hails from the Vaana clan. His full
name is Vallavaraiyan Vandhiya Thevan. Am I right?”

“Oh My God! Akka, it’s true that you have powers of divination.”

“Oh My silly girl! If you have lost your heart to somebody why don’t you tell
your brother about him? Why should you lure Madhuranthakan? Or drag
Adithya Karikalan all the way here only to disappoint him?”

“Akka, my brother Kandhanmaran does not like him.”

“But in what way does that matter? Tell me, is your brother going to marry him?
But didn’t you tell me that it was Kandhanmaran who first told you about
Vandhiya Thevan? And it was your brother who brought him here.”

“Yes, you are right. It was he who first spoke about him. It was he who brought
him here. But then suddenly there was a change of mind. And there’s a reason
for that as well. He stabbed my brother when they were in Thanjavur. And my
brother was lying sick in your palace. And it was because you took good care of
him that he came back to life.”

“Your brother has this habit of exaggerating things. He was just staying in our
Palace. I didn’t do much. This is not the time to discuss that. What are you going
to do now? Your lover has become your brother’s avowed enemy.”

“But do you know what he says?”

“”Who is this ‘He’ you are alluding to?”

“It’s him, Akka. Please don’t tease me. You told his name a little while ago. He
swears that he never stabbed Kandhanmaran. Somebody had stabbed him and
had left him bleeding near the walls of Thanjavur Fort. And then it was he who
saved my brother.”

“When did he tell that to you?”

“Yesterday.”

“Did you see Vandhiya Thevan yesterday? Didn’t you say that you only saw his
apparition?”

“That’s it, Akka. I am confused. I am not clear whether I saw him or his
apparition. When I think back on what happened yesterday everything looks like
a dream. They say if somebody dies their spirit will manifest as apparition and
talk to us. Is it true, Akka?”

When Manimekalai asked this question the fear in her voice was apparent.
Nandini too shuddered in fear. She was staring pointlessly at the ceiling and
spoke in a distant voice.

“Yes, it’s true. If someone died young their spirits would be hovering around
those who are living. If they had been beheaded the head alone would appear at

times. At times the headless trunk would appear. And sometimes the head and
the body will come separately pestering you, ‘Have you avenged my death
yet?’”

And then she spoke aloud.

“Silly girl! Why do you ask that question? Do you fear that something terrible
must have happened to your lover? Who planted that doubt in your mind?”

“There’s a person who deals with spirits in this palace. He’d be possessed by
spirits at times and would blurt out what’s happening in the world. I sent for him.
But he had been beaten up by somebody. His wife, Devaratti, came in his stead.
And she told me all those things.”

“Don’t believe those stupid things.”

“No, Akka. I didn’t. If he had come as a mere spirit I could not have touched
him.”

“You can neither touch a spirit nor an apparition. Why are you telling that now?
Did you touch your lover yesterday?”

“That’s where I am confused, Akka. I feel that I have touched him. But now
when I think of many other things I am not sure.”

“Tell me what happened yesterday. Don’t leave anything out. I’ll clear your
doubts.”

“Ok, Akka. If I jumble up things please stop me. Ask questions if you do not
understand, Akka. I was here in this place yesterday almost at the same time as
now. I came here to check whether your room has been properly made according
the strict instructions given by my brother. I was looking at my face in this
mirror.”

“Oh, you were admiring your own beauty?”

“No, Akka. I know about my face. Not worth looking at.”

“Why are you so harsh on yourself? Your face is flawless. It will make the
Goddess of Love, Rathi Devi and the wife of the chief of gods, Indrani burn in
jealousy.”

“But they are not worth the dirt in your feet, Akka.”

“Ok go ahead. You were looking your face in the mirror.”

“Suddenly another face appeared in the mirror. It was very close to mine.”

“Was that your lover’s face?”

“Yes! I was shocked!”

“Why should you be shocked? Didn’t you say that you were seeing his face in
your dreams quite often?”

“Yes, I did. But there was a difference. In my dreams the face used to be at a
distance. Same is the case when he comes as an apparition. But here... here... it
was from behind..... I feel very shy... Akka… “

“Naughty girl. Tell me exactly what happened.”

“It appeared as if the face came to kiss me on my cheeks. I turned around in
shock. There was nobody there. Nor could I see the face in the mirror. I had a
doubt. Do you remember the secret door from this room that leads to the
Hunters’ Hall? I showed it to you. Yesterday the mirror was placed just opposite
to the door. I thought somebody must have opened the door from the Hunters’
Hall and must have peeped out. I thought it was not possible. How can a stranger
enter that hall? Impossible! For whatever it was worth I opened the door and
went into that hall.”

Nandini was very curious now.

“Was the thief hiding in the Hunters’ Hall? Was he caught?”

“Akka, why do you call him a thief?”

“Not in a derogatory sense, dear. Didn’t he steal your heart? I was referring to
that. Tell me, was he in that hall?”

“Surprise of surprises, Akka. He was not there. There was only our man
Idumban Kari who was cleaning the hall. His face resembled the gory face of
Kaduvetti Karuppan a statue placed outside the Ayyanar temple. ‘Was anybody
else here in this hall?’ I asked him. He insisted there was nobody other than him
in that hall.”

“Do you think he would have lied?”

“I don’t know, Akka. But I had a strong feeling that someone was hiding in the
hall. ‘Let the culprit come out on his own’, I thought and came back to this
room.”

“But did he come out?”

“Please let me continue. After I came to this room I was listening for the sound
of people speaking in the Hunters’ Hall. Yes, I did hear some voices. I also heard
something falling down. When I was debating what to do, this door opened. I hid
the lamp and was waiting. There is a small round door within this large door. A
figure was trying to enter this room through that small door. “Danger! Danger!
Please save me.” I heard somebody shouting. As the voice and the figure
resembled him I helped him through that small door. Then I rekindled the lamp.
Yes, Akka. It was him!”

“Manimekalai, that’s a surprise. It looks like a page from the famous
Vikramadithya Stories.”

“I am not finished, Akka. When I first saw the person who had been very regular
in my dreams for the past four months, my heart skipped a beat. I became
ecstatic. But I feigned anger and talked to him in that tone.

“How can you enter the ladies’ chambers like this?” I asked him. He told me he
was being chased by somebody who wanted to kill him. “You are a coward. You
are afraid to die.” I teased him. He told me that he was not armed. I accused him
of back-stabbing my brother. ‘No. I never did that. I will never do that.’ He
swore, Akka.”

“And you believed him?”

“At that time he appeared credible. But when I think of the subsequent
developments I am not very sure, Akka.”

“What happened?”

“As I was talking to him I was also listening to the sounds coming from the
Hunters’ Hall. I could hear several people walking in the hall. And I could hear
many people talking too. I then thought maybe he is telling the truth. And that
these people were after him. My only concern at that time was to save him from
danger, Akka. I wanted to know about the persons who were intent on killing
him. I even suspected Idumban Kari. He could be an accomplice to the killers.
Or he could be an accomplice to this man. I wanted to know.

“I was also worried that so many people know about the secret passage from the
Hunters’ Hall to this room. And when I realised that you will be staying in this
room I was even more worried. I did not have the courage to send word to my
father. If he came to know of his presence he will be killed. So I asked him to
stay here and went back to the Hunters’ Hall to see who else was there. There
were five or six of them. They were all in the corner of the hall huddling close to
the wall. They were shocked on seeing me. I too was afraid of them. I drove
away my fears and wanted to ask about the strangers in an angry voice. By that
time my friend Chandramathi came to this room looking for me. She was calling
“Amma... Amma...”

“Only then I remembered that he was alone in the room. I was afraid that
Chandramathi might see him and scream. I returned to this room making a
mental note to go back to the Hunters Hall later in the day. By that time this man
had vanished without a trace.

“Did you see anybody here?” I asked my friend. She had not seen anybody. I
searched for him and then unable to find him I went back to the Hunters’ Hall.
Nobody whom I saw earlier was there. Idumban Kari was the only person in the
hall. He was busy with his cleaning work. “What happened to those who were
here sometime ago? Who were they?” I asked Idumbankari.

“Nobody came here, Your Highness.” He kept on insisting. I could not believe
him. My friend Chandramathi started teasing me. “Akka, something has
happened to you. I think you’ve gone crazy. You are seeing people who are not
there.”

Then she told me that you people have reached the gates of our Fort. And that,
my father wanted me to receive you. So I left for the Palace gates. To reach the
gates faster I took two flights of stairs up and reached the terrace. As I was

walking on the terrace I saw something strange. The warrior from the Vaana clan
was walking in the back yard of the palace along the wall. I even saw him
jumping the wall using a bamboo pole. Yes, that was how it appeared to my
eyes. Did it really happen or did I hallucinate, I do not know.”

Nandini was lost in thoughts. The two faces she saw in the midst of the thick
forest growth just outside the Palace appeared in her mind. She knew that
horsemen had been sent to capture those two people. Would they have been
captured by now? And if they were, would they be brought here?

“What do you think, Akka?”

Manimekalai’s words broke her reverie.

“Me? Are you asking me? Well, I think that you are now madly in love.”

“Are you teasing me like my friend Chandramathi?”

“No, my dear girl. I’ll be the last person to make fun of your love. It was you
who saw him. Even you can’t tell whether it was real, or a dream or a
hallucination. How can I tell, my dear? Is there any secret way to get out of this
room?”

“As far as I know, there is none, Akka.”

“He could have gone the same way used by you and Chandramathi.”

“There were several maids on the way. He could not have gone without their
knowledge.”

“Quite surprising! Did you tell your father about this? “

“No, Akka. I didn’t. I am a little shy. I am also afraid, Akka. If he had really
come here... “

“You are right. Its better you don’t tell these things to men. They won’t
understand.”

“I am debating whether I should tell my brother or not.”

“If you tell him it will become a big issue. He wants you to marry Karikalan at
any cost.”

“You will have to help me, Akka. Kandhanmaran is devoted to you. If you tell
him he won’t refuse… Please... Akka... “

“Oh My God! You are making me work against the very purpose of my visit.
You are a very smart girl. Assuming that your marriage to Karikalan is dropped
we are not sure about the other person. You don’t know what’s in his mind.
What’s the guarantee that he’d marry you?”

“I am not bothered about that, Akka. Even if he doesn’t like me... “

“That’s the fate of women. Whatever men do women have to love them and even
give up their lives for them. That’s the rule. Let’s see your luck. If something
like what happened yesterday happens now you should tell me. Will you?”

“Who else can I tell, Akka? I had a dream yesterday. Want to share that with
you.”

“In addition to day-dreaming you also dream in the night. What was that again?
Did he come again in the dream to deceive you?”

“No, Akka. This is something different. And quite frightening too. They say that
if you dream in the wee hours of morning it’s likely to happen. Is that true,
Akka?”

“First tell me your dream. Did you dream about somebody else?”

“No, Akka. About the same man. I saw somebody was about to stab him. He
was unarmed. But there was a shining sword lying on the floor. I grabbed the
sword and pounced on the killer. I was about to stab the killer. Only then did I
see his face. He was my brother Kandhanmaran. I screamed and woke up. I was
bathed in sweat. I was shivering. Though it was a dream it seemed like real. If it
comes true..... Oh My God!”

“Oh my dear! You are really confused. Whatever was real looks like an illusion
to you. Whatever was a dream looks like real to you. What a friend I have got! If
I am crazy, you are crazier still.”

Chandramathi came in at that time.

“They are on the way. We have got news that they have crossed the
Veeranarayana Lake.”

Chapter 15 - The Royal Hospitality

The gates of the Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar Palace witnessed a miracle on that
day. To the point eyes could see the place was filled with people. There were
men, women, children and even aged people in that crowd.

Those old men and women who could not stand on their own used the support of
canes to stand near the Palace gates. . They were so anxious to see the valiant
face of Adithya Karikalan that they did not mind being shoved around by the
jostling crowd. The children did not mind being squeezed by the crowd. They
used all their energies to move further up in the crowd and go near the gates.
Young women forgot their traditional sense of shame. They did not mind being
pushed and touched by strangers and were trying to move forward. Young men
on the other hand did not pay heed to those young women but were keen on
capturing vantage points from which they could have a better view of the
visiting Royalty, the Crown Prince. Many young men had even climbed up the
trees standing near and opposite to the Kadambur Palace. Others even risked
climbing up the outer walls of the palace and were pushed down by the security
guards.

There were many young mothers balancing their infants on their hips waiting for
a glimpse of the Crown Prince. To be in the midst of such a jostling crowd was
an unmitigated suffering for them. Yet they were cooing to their dear ones,
“Please don’t cry, dear. The greatest warrior of the Tamilnadu, the one who
beheaded Veerapandiyan, the one and only Adithya Karikalan is about to pass
through before our eyes. If you happen to see him once one day you may also
become a warrior like him.” In the same way the lovers were pacifying their
beloved, and mothers, their children.

Adithya Karikalan’s fame had spread throughout the kingdom. Who would not

be keen to see the person who stepped into the battlefield at the age of twelve,
the one who wielded the sword at such a young age and killed many an enemy,
the one who crushed the Pandya forces at the Sevur battlefield and made the
Pandya King Veerapandiyan flee to a desert and hide himself in a cave, the one
who at his 19th year of age broke through the personal bodyguards of
Veerapandiyan, found out his place of hiding and brought his head back as a
war-souvenir?

Of course there were several rumours concerning the Crown Prince; most of
them gained strength during the last three, four years. It was rumoured that after
Adithya Karikalan was designated as the Crown Prince he broke off with his
father Sundara Chozhan and that the old emperor did not want him to ascend the
throne after him.

In the past, a Chozha Prince who had ruled over Kanchi soon started the great
Pallava dynasty. According to another rumour doing rounds- the Crown Prince
also wanted to start a new dynasty in Kanchi. Some said that Adithya Karikalan
was put off by the special love the Emperor had for his younger son
Arulmozhivarman. Others violently denied such rumours and insisted that it was
rare to see such loving brothers like Karikalan and Arulmozhivarman.

There were also rumours about Karikalan still remaining unmarried. It was
rumoured that the Crown Prince refused to marry King’s daughters and insisted
on marrying a priest’s daughter and making her his queen. And that was the
reason for the stand-off between the son and the father, the rumour-mongers
explained.

Another set of rumours went on a different line. That the Crown Prince had lost
his mind thanks to some wicked spell cast by the evil sorcerers of the Pandya
Kingdom and it was precisely for that reason that the Chieftains of the Chozha
Empire did not want him to succeed the Emperor.

Whatever may be the rumours people were dying to see the Crown Prince. Even
as the news spread that he was going to visit the Kadambur Palace it created a
storm in the vicinity. When it was confirmed that the Prince was going to come
to the palace that evening people from all the villages in the radius of twenty
miles had assembled to see him.

The words coming from thousands of mouths lost their meanings and became
the meaningless roar of a sea in turbulence.

The security guards had cleared the way for the Prince and his retinue near the
Palace gates. As people pushed those in the front they in turn moved forward
blocking the way reserved for the Prince. The guards shoved them away to clear
the way. This back and forth action too resembled the waves in the ocean.

Aperson standing on the top branch of a tree shouted. “They are coming!”

“Where? Where?” - A thousand voices shouted in unison. A horse came running
at full speed. To avoid being trodden by the horse people moved quickly to give
way.

“The Sambuvaraiyar Prince” - they recognised the horse-rider. Yes,
Kandhanmaran had come. He did not answer the anxious question posed to him
by the people. He rode fast till the Palace gate and then dismounted.

He saw Sambuvaraiyar and Pazhuvettaraiyar standing there. He bowed to them
and told them almost in a whisper.

“The Crown Prince is coming. But he is not in his moods. Very short tempered. I
rode ahead only to caution you. Let us accord a Royal reception to him. Even if
he were to utter something unpleasant let’s not mind it. Let’s not even respond to
it.”

He then looked up at the terrace. He saw the women of the Royal household
waiting in the terrace of the first tower. He then entered the fort and climbed up
the stairs to the terrace.

As soon as he reached the terrace his eyes avoided all others and sought Nandini.
He went near her.

“Devi, I’ve delivered on my promise. I have brought the Prince with me. There
he is. But as of now he behaves like a mad elephant. I don’t know how we are
going to manage him.”

“Why do you worry about that? What do you need to control a mad elephant? A
goad, right? You have two, in the form of your sister’s beautiful eyes. So there is
no need to worry.”

Manimekalai squealed.

“Akka, what’s this?”

Kandhanmaran responded to his sister:

“Manimekalai, there’s nothing wrong in what the Pazhuvur Queen says. One
should have done penance to have somebody like Adithya Karikalan as one’s
husband.”

Before Manimekalai could answer Nandini intervened.

“Is somebody else coming along with the Prince?”

“Yes, Parthibendra Pallavan and Vandhiya Thevan are coming along.”

Nandini threw a pointed glance at Manimekalai and asked Kandhanmaran:

“Which Vandhiya Thevan? You said you have a friend by that name? Is that
him?”

“Yes, the true friend who tried to back-stab me. He jumped from nowhere and
joined us at the banks of River Vellaru. I am putting up with him only for the
sake of the Prince. Otherwise I would have made him a prey to my sword.”

Manimekalai’s face fell.

“Anna, if it’s true that he tried to stab you, why should we let him inside our
palace?”

“Don’t poke your nose into the men’s affairs, dear. They’ll fight with each other
today; and then become thick friends tomorrow. That’s their way of life.”

Kandhanmaran smiled.

“It’s not like that. I just said that I had to overlook that because of the Prince. Oh,
you have got so many baskets of flowers! If you shower the flowers on the
Prince his tempers will cool and he’ll be his usual cool self. See there, they have
come. Let me go down to receive them.”

Kandhanmaran ran through the steps.

Seen from that terrace it appeared as if there was a raging ocean of people and in
a particular spot there was a swirl. And the three horsemen appeared like a boat
caught in that swirl of current. The next moment they were covered by the sea of
people. The ‘swirl’ travelled further and reached the gates of the palace.

The three horsemen were the Crown Prince, Vandhiya Thevan and Parthibendra
Pallavan. The elephants, horses and infantry were blocked by the crowd far away
from the gates. Their horses stopped at the gates. The band started to play. There
were twenty drums, two hundred trumpets, about three hundred thara, a
percussion instrument and five hundred little drums. The sound coming from the
band silenced the crowd. After a while the band stopped playing. The herald
seized the opportunity, climbed up the platform and roared in a thunderous
voice:

“Manumanthatha born in the Surya clan! The great emperor Sibi born of the
same clan, the man who gave his flesh to save the life of a dove, Rajakesari who
was born after Sibi, His son, Parakesari, the great Manuneethi Chozhan who
sacrificed his own son in order to render justice to a cow in his Kingdom,
Karikal Peruvalavan who made the Tiger Flag fly high in the Himalayas,
Nalankilli, Nedunkilli, Perunarkilli, Kulamutrathu Thunjia Killi Valavan,
Kurappalli Thunjia Killivalavan, Koperunchozhar, who established 72 temples
for Lord Shiva, the great one who came on this line of Kings who bore ninety
and six wounds on his body, Pazhaiyaarai Vijayaalaya Chozhan, His son, the one
who established 82 temples for Lord Shiva on the banks of River Cauvery from
Sasya Hills to the city of Poompuhar, His son, the one who vanquished Madurai
and Lanka and the one who build the Golden Hall at Thillai Chidambaram
Temple, Emperor Paranthaka Chozha, His son, the One who defeated the forces
of the Kannara Thevan of the Twin Provinces, and the one who died in Aatroor,
the valiant Arinjaya Chozhan, His son, the who has brought the region from
Lanka to Cheetpuli Country under one rule, Emperor Pazhaiyaarai Paranthaka
Sundara Chozhan, His first born, the Crown Prince, the Head of the Armed
Forces of the Kingdom In the North, the one who beheaded Veerapandiyan,
Adithya Karikalan comes here! Parak! Parak!”

When the person finished heralding the visit of the Crown Prince it appeared as
if the rains had just stopped.

Another herald standing near him now started:

“The King of Kolli Hills, the man who by a single arrow could kill a lion, a bear,
a deer, a boar - The warrior Valvil Ori - the One who was born in his clan, the
King of Kings, the Warrior of Warriors, the Brave and Majestic - Sambuvaraiyar
- the one who is an eternal friend to the Chozha Emperor, the One who guards
the Veeranarayana Lake - the one who heads five-thousand strong army, the
Sambuvaraiyar begs of the Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan, with all his heart
and soul that He be pleased to visit his small palace and grace Him! May the
visit of the Chozha Prince bring auspiciousness to all!”

Once the heralding was over the women in the terrace showered flowers on the
visitors. Adithya Karikalan and Vandhiya Thevan looked up. There amongst
many beautiful faces Vandhiya Thevan could only see the fully blossomed face
of Manimekalai. Forgetting himself he smiled at her. Only then he realised his
mistake and turned around to look at the other side.

Adithya Karikalan’s face now showed greater signs of irritation. He jumped off
from the horse. The other two also dismounted. The band started playing again.
The people who remained silent till then started shouting. The guests and hosts
entered the Fort. The gates were then closed with a big noise.

The sound of the gates closing distracted the Crown Prince.

“Why should they close the doors in such a hurry? Are they planning to imprison
me inside this Fort, as they have imprisoned my father in Thanjavur? What will
happen to my retinue?”

The two old men - Sambuvaraiyar and Pazhuvettaraiyar - were stunned.

Pazhuvettaraiyar managed a smile and spoke to him in a sweet voice.

“Prince, your father and you are forever imprisoned in the loving hearts of the
millions of people of this Kingdom. How can anyone imprison you otherwise?”

Sambuvaraiyar added:

“Prince, if all those who have come to see you enter this palace what will
happen? Even when they were standing outside the orchards and gardens around
the Palace have gone waste as if run over by an army of unruly monkeys. Once
the people go away we will safely bring in your retinue to the Palace. Till such
time we have organized an army of men to take care of your personal needs,
Prince.”

By that time the noise made by the people outside the Fort increased. Karikalan
asked Kandhanmaran, “Show me the way to the terrace.”

Kandhanmaran pointed out to the stairs. Karikalan almost ran to them.
Kandhanmaran, Parthibendra Pallavan and Vandhiya Thevan ran behind him.

Sambuvaraiyar could not hold himself any longer.

“What’s this? I think we have unnecessarily brought in a terrible nuisance. I
don’t think he is of the right mind. We have listened to youngsters and have
invited disaster on ourselves.”

“Don’t worry. Nothing will happen. Either our plans will succeed. Or will not.
Who bothers?” - Pazhuvettaraiyar was calm and collected.

“I am not concerned about our plans. If something happens when he stays here
then I’ll be in trouble. The omens and signs are not good. And the Crown Prince
looks like a mad elephant. Did you see the irritation on his face? And the
stinging poison in his words?”

“Yes, I did. I guess we may have to grin and bear it for a few days. That
Parthibendra Pallavan will help us rein him in. There’s another young man who
has come along. I hate him. I have a doubt that he is a spy. He was there when
we first had our meeting here. He was the one hiding behind the tree yesterday
evening.”

“Oh, he is my son’s friend. Let’s not worry about him. Why are they running to
the ladies’ side? Should we also go?”

By this time Parthibendra Pallavan who had gone with the other two till the
stairs had come back. He came near the two old men. He could hear the last
words spoken by Sambuvaraiyar.

“Your Highness can doubt the Crown Prince in any other department. But not
regarding women. He never looks at women.”

“Then how will our plan work?” Pazhuvettaraiyar asked him.

“Well that depends on Sambuvaraiyar’s luck and the Chozha Empire’s luck.”

“Parthibendra, let’s forget Manimekalai’s luck. Why should the Prince come
with this kind of an irritation? Why should he talk in that venomous tone? My
only prayer to you is that somehow you should take him back from here without
any incident.”

“Till we reached the banks of River Vellaru, the Prince was cheerful and cordial.
And then this Vandhiya Thevan and another Vaishnavite came in. They must
have told him something. From then on the Prince’s face has become like this.”

“We thought so. Now tell me what can we do now? That trouble-maker young
man has also come with you... “

“Be a little more patient. I’ll take care of everything. I have a score to settle with
that young man. I am looking for the right time.”

When Karikalan and the two men reached the terrace the women were coming
down the steps.

Karikalan spoke to Kandhanmaran.

“Friend, how can you make these mothers wait for us? It’s not right. We should
go to their place to pay our respects to them.”

He kept his hands folded and let the women pass on the stairs. As every woman
walked past him he asked Kandhanmaran about her. When it was Nandini’s turn
Karikalan explained, “Oh it’s my little grandmother from Pazhuvur! Oh, has she
really come? I am very happy.”

Nandini did not respond. But only glanced daggers at him with here sharp eyes.
Karikalan’s body shuddered due to the intensity of her glance. The next minute
Karikalan gathered himself and started teasing Manimekalai who was tagging

along.

“Oh, this must be your sister Manimekalai. She looks like a painting of a
celestial woman. We should find a proper groom for her.”

Manimekalai’s cheeks became red. There were dimples in her cheeks. She saw
Vandhiya Thevan through the corner of her eyes and started climbing down the
stairs pretty fast.

After all the women had left the place Karikalan climbed up the terrace. The
people who had just started to disburse became excited and started hailing him.
They started coming back to the gates of the Fort.

Karikalan saw the herald standing alone in a raised platform very close to the
terrace. He signalled him to come near him. When he did he ordered him to
make some announcements to the people on his behalf.

The herald went back to his place and beat his drums. He repeated some of the
achievements of Karikalan and then spoke in a loud voice:

“And that Prince Adithya Karikalan will stay in this Kadambur Palace for a
week or ten days. He will be visiting the surrounding villages as well. He will be
meeting the people and would receive petitions from them.”

That did it. Whatever the noise the crowd had been making hitherto appeared
relatively as perfect silence. The noise reached the sky. The sound of people

applauding their prince, hailing him and the sheer excitement in their voice rose
up in the air and spread to the vicinity even submerging the sound of water going
through the seventy four canals of the Veeranarayanapuram Lake.

Sambuvaraiyar, Pazhuvettaraiyar and Parthibendra Pallavan were standing in the
same place. Karikalan came back from the terrace and went near them. He talked
to Parthibendran:

“What happened to you Parthibendra? Why are you stuck up here? By any
chance have you too started to conspire with these old men?”

The old men were shocked. They saw the handsome face of the Prince. He was
now sporting an innocent smile.

Sambuvaraiyar gathered himself to speak:

“My Lord, you told a little while ago that you were imprisoned here. Now you
are talking about conspiracy. I swear, My Lord, that during your stay here in my
hut you will be absolutely safe and nothing will happen to you. And if it did my
life would have left my body before that.”

“Do you think I am afraid of the danger that might happen here? Even while I
was in the midst of hundred thousand enemies in the Pandya Kingdom I never
thought about my safety nor did I worry about my life. Then why should I fear
when I am in the midst of my close friends? But please do not call this palace a
hut. Oh My God! How tall are the walls! How strong! The walls are bigger than
those in Thanjavur Fort. Tell me this, what kind of enemies did you have in mind
before designing such strong walls?”

“Prince, we do not have any enemies. Anybody who is an enemy to the Chozha
Kingdom is our enemy. Anybody who is a friend to the Chozhas is our friend.”

“Your words make me very happy. I request you to share them with your son
Kandhanmaran. For he sees my friend the Prince of Vaana clan Vandhiya
Thevan as his enemy. Is that not a great blunder?”

Kandhanmaran hung down his head.

Chapter 16 - Malaiyaman’s Worry

There was a huge yard in the Sambuvaraiyar Palace between the Palace and the
compound wall. While Kandhanmaran was leading the way Karikalan walked
behind him looking around quite often. The other four men followed him.

They reached the place where a podium and a shamiana had been erected for
Kuravai Koothu.

“Oh, God! What is this? What’s going to happen here?” - Karikalan asked.

“My Lord, if you so desire, we plan to have Kuravai Koothu here.”

“Very good. You can have Kuravai Koothu. You can have Villupattu as well.
You can enact plays depicting the lives of Karikal Valavan and Vijayaalaya
Chozhan. We’ll spend our mornings in the forest hunting wild animals. We’ll
spend the nights in singing, dancing and drama. Sambuvaraiyar, do you know
what my grandfather Malaiyaman told me? ‘Don’t sleep in the night,’ he
cautioned me. I told him - “Grandfather, I don’t sleep in the day. Nor do I sleep
in the night. It has been three full years since I have had a good sleep. So you
need not fear that my enemies will kill me while I am sleeping. Yes, they can
harm me while I am awake. But there is no man in this world bold enough to do
that.” This is how I consoled my grandfather.

Karikalan then started laughing loudly.

Sambuvaraiyar’s voice trembled in anger. “My Lord, whether you sleep or
remain awake, so long as you are here in this palace no one can harm you.”

“Yes, Yes. Who the hell can hurt me in this Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace? Can
anybody cross these high walls and enter the palace? Even the Lord of Death
cannot come. The Lord of Death is afraid of Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar. I just
shared the baseless fears of the old man from Thirukkovilur, my grandfather, I
mean. See, he has become very old. Some men tend to lose their courage with
the onset of old age. Now take a look at my Pazhuvur Grandfather. How majestic
is his walk! Can anyone say that he has crossed sixty years of age?”

Karikalan smiled.

Pazhuvettaraiyar badly wanted to give a retort. He cleared his throat. The noise
resembled the roar of a lion.

“See, when the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar clears his throat the whole world
trembles in fear. Kandhamara, Vandhiya Theva, Parthibendra! Just think! Will
you be half as strong as him at his age? Perhaps you may clear your throats like
he does. But you will never bring a new girl to your harem at his age.

“Thatha! It appears that you have brought your Junior Queen along with you. I
saw her in the terrace. Tell me this, Thatha. How did she travel? In a closed
palanquin? Or in an open chariot? Or in a cart?”

Pazhuvettaraiyar could not hold himself any longer.

“I brought her along on the top of the elephant. I wanted the whole world to
know.”

“That’s the way, Thatha! Let her travel in the same way hereafter. Don’t bring
her in a closed palanquin. That gives rise to many juicy rumours. Just listen to
this. At times my uncle Madhuranthakan uses the Junior Queen’s closed
Palanquin to go places. That rumour has spread throughout the country.”

Karikalan’s laugh resembled the sound of a thunder.

Nobody else laughed. Everyone was concerned in his own way.

Vandhiya Thevan bit his tongue. ‘Oh My God! I have done the greatest blunder
of my life! I have disclosed everything to this crazy man. Looks like he is going
to share everything with these people.’ Vandhiya Thevan was worried.

The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s mind was like a volcano about to erupt. There was
fire and smoke. And before the fire and lava escaped out of the volcano it boiled
inside creating a roaring sound when he cleared his throat.

Before he could talk, Parthibendran came forward.

“My Lord! It has been only for a short time that I know the Junior Queen of
Pazhuvur. But within that short time I came to know how devoted a woman she
is. She is like a goddess when it comes to chastity, my Lord. If anybody ventures
to comment on her I’ll make that man a victim to my sword. This is a promise,

my Lord.”

Kandhanmaran came forward next.

“I need not have to draw a sword. Anybody who talks ill of the Junior Queen of
Pazhuvur will be killed by my bare hands. That’s a promise, my Lord.”

Vandhiya Thevan was not to be left behind.

“Same is the case with me. If anybody talks ill of the Pazhuvur Queen I’ll kill
him with my mere looks.”

“Aha! Wait, my dear friends. Looks like you’ll even pick up a fight with me.
Thatha, did you see, how these people are anxious to protect the good name of
the Tamil woman. But let me make myself clear. Nobody has spoken ill of the
Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. And if anybody did I won’t keep quiet. I won’t even
wait till these warriors come to finish off the person. People are not talking ill of
the Pazhuvur Queen but only of her closed palanquin. That coward
Madhuranthakan uses it to go from one town to another. He uses it for his secret
trips. When a man uses that closed palanquin covering the sides with screens and
the Queen too travels in the same way it might give rise to a scandal.”

“My Lord, why should the grandson of Emperor Paranthaka and the son of
Kandaraathithar, Madhuranthakan travel in a closed palanquin? I don’t
understand.” - Parthibendra Pallavan said.

“The reasons are funny. Madhuranthakan goes to every town in Tamilnadu in
that palanquin and is gathering support for his side.”

“Why?”

“Why? To ascend the great Chozha throne after my father. Isn’t it funny? A few
months ago he visited this same Kadambur Palace in a closed palanquin. There
was a meeting of conspirators at mid-night. Parthibendra, the old man of
Thirukkovilur, told me all these things only in your presence. Madhuranthakan is
now anxious to become the Chozha King at the earliest. My grandfather is even
afraid that in his anxiety he might even pack off my father to the other world
earlier than his time. Don’t you remember all those things?”

“Yes, Prince. I do remember. I never believed those things even when he told
them. Nor do I believe them now. Its better that you visit Thanjavur and see your
father. Then.... “

“Not only you, but even I didn’t believe it. Otherwise do you think I’d have
come as a guest to Kadambur Palace?”

Karikalan thought about something and laughed.

Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar cleared his throat and spoke.

“My Lord, you know very well about the enmity between our clan and that of
Thirukkovilur Malaiyaman.”

“I know. The Sangam Poets have composed songs on that enmity. Malaiyaman
Thirumudikkari killed Valvil Ori of Kolli Hills in a war. You all belong to the
Valvil Ori clan. So you are not in good terms with Thirukkovilur.”

“My Lord, Valvil Ori’s death was avenged immediately thereafter. Adhiyaman
Nedumananchi, a close relative of Valvil Ori, invaded Thirukkovilur and
destroyed that town. He also razed the Mullur Hill Fort of Malaiyaman to the
ground.”

“Sambuvaraiyar, Adhiyaman did not do that all by himself. He sought the help
of our ancestor Chozhan Killi Valavan. He could vanquish Malaiyaman only
with his help. But what’s the need to dig up those old stories?”

“We have been trying to forget the past; but Malaiyaman never lets us to. He has
been accusing us of something or the other.”

“Didn’t I tell you? Malaiyaman has become old. And hence has become senile. I
am now concerned that he should not come with a huge army while I am here.
He is too worried about my safety here.”

“Prince, if you have any doubt... “

Sambuvaraiyar was lost for words.

“Doubt? No way. Our relationship with Malaiyaman has been for only two

generations. But our relationship with the Pazhuvettaraiyars has been for six
generations. Pazhuvur King is here with us. Am I that crazy to think that he’ll do
anything against the Chozha clan?”

Karikalan’s laugh was that of a mad man.

Pazhuvettaraiyar spoke in a majestic voice.

“Prince, I won’t do anything against the Chozha clan. That’s a promise. I won’t
do anything against fairness and justice. My second promise is two times
stronger than the first. . ”

“Yes, there is something called justice and fairness. I’ve come to discuss that
with you. If we have some time left after hunting and drama we’ll discuss
fairness and justice. Sambuvaraiyar, have you got the rooms ready for me and
my friends in this great palace?”

“Your Highness, I’ve made the entire Guest Chambers in the back row ready for
you and the Pazhuvettaraiyars. I’ll make the other chieftains stay in the front
rooms.”

“Oh more chieftains are going to come?”

“Yes, Prince. All the Chieftains in the vicinity want to see you.”

“Let them come. Good. Let’s us sit down and discuss. And decide. Let’s try to
come to a decision. Let Madhuranthakan’s conspiracy be there. I plan to have a
conspiracy with you all. There is no place more ideal for that than this Palace.”

Chapter 17 - Poonkuzhali’s Heart

Poonkuzhali’s small boat was gliding through the waters of the canal that went
all the way from Nagapattinam to Kodikkarai. Chendan Amudhan was on board
with her. The boat was nearing Kodikkarai. The banks of the canal strongly
smelled of golden hued screw pine flowers that had just blossomed. A parrot
alighted on a screw pine flower. The flower could not bear the weight of the bird
and it swayed. The parrot too swayed along with the flower and then plucked the
petals with its pearly nose.

As soon as the boat came near the parrot screeched and flew away.

“If there’s another birth I want to be born as a parrot.” - Poonkuzhali.

“That’s your thinking, Poonkuzhali. But we do not know about its pains, its
problems and its sorrows.” - Chendan Amudhan.

“Whatever may be its problems it can fly in the boundless sky anytime it wants.
What can give greater happiness than the freedom to fly in the high skies?”

“But some people cage these parrots!”

“Yes, they do. The princesses living in the palaces keep the parrots in cages.
Heartless devils. They cage the parrots and then play with them. If only I were a
maid in any of these palaces I’ll give poison to the caged parrots and kill them

all. And then I’ll feed poison to the princesses and kill them as well.”

“If somebody hears your words you’ll also be branded as a heartless devil.”

“Let them. I’d rather be a devil than a princess.”

“Why do you hate the princesses, Poonkuzhali? In a way they too deserve our
sympathy. Their fate is no different from those caged parrots. They are caged
within their palaces and spend their whole lives there. And if only they had to
step out of their palaces... Oh My God! How many security restrictions! How
many protocols! What kind of care they would have to take! What kind of
secrecy they’d have to maintain! Oh My God! Do you think they can row their
boats like you do across the sea and along the canals of the country? Do you
think they can freely roam in the forest like a deer as you do?”

“Who asked them to be caged? I never said that. If they wish they can also roam
in the forests.”

“If only wishes were horses… Poonkuzhali. It depends on their birth and the
way they have been brought up. You want to fly in the sky like a parrot. But
that’s impossible. You were born on the shores of a sea. That has given you so
much of freedom. If you had been born in a palace you won’t be free. Listen;
there is another paradox. If the caged parrots get used to the princesses and the
royal food they won’t fly away even if their cages are thrown open. They will fly
for a while and then return to their princesses with their usual screeching sound.
I have seen this happening in the palaces in Thanjavur and Pazhaiyaarai.”

“I’ll never let myself be caged like that. If only I were a parrot and if only I were

caged by a Princess then I’ll bite the hand of the princess which comes to feed
me.”

“So you will neither be a caged parrot nor a princess caged in her own palace.”

“No. I’d rather take poison and die.”

“That’s good. In that case you should not desire to marry a Prince living in a
Palace.”

The clouds were gathering in the east. There were flashes of lightning. The
rumbling of the thunder was heard at a distance. When Chendan Amudhan spoke
those words there were flashes of lightning coming from Poonkuzhali’s bright
eyes.

“Who told you that I want to marry a Prince?”

“Nobody told me. I just guessed. If you do not have that kind of a desire then it’s
good. Forget whatever I said.”

For a while silence reigned over the moving boat. Chendan Amudhan was
pushing the oars. Added to that was the sound of the frogs. And the distant
rumbling of thunder and the sound of waves coming from a distant sea.

Chendan Amudhan cleared his throat. He gathered his courage before speaking

out his mind.

“Poonkuzhali, didn’t you say that Vandhiya Thevan told you about the desire in
my heart? It’ll be better if I get an answer from you at least now. There I could
see the lighthouse of Kodikkarai. I may not get another chance to talk to you in
private. I may have to leave for Thanjavur tomorrow. My mother has been alone
there for quite some time.”

“Why should Vandhiya Thevan act as your messenger? What happened to your
mouth? Why don’t you tell me directly what’s there in your heart?”

“Ok, have your way. Will you marry me?”

“Why do you ask this question?”

“Because I love you.”

“Should love always end in a marriage?”

“Not necessary. But that has been the practice in this world from time
immemorial.”

“What will you give me if I marry you? Can you give me the royal life I
deserve? Can you give me dresses, jewels, elephants, horses, palanquins and
maids?”

“Of course, I cannot. But I will give you a peaceful life which is more precious
than all those regal paraphernalia. Listen, Poonkuzhali. My hut is in a beautiful
garden in Thanjavur. I and my mother live there. If you come there your whole
life will change. My mother will look after you like her own daughter. We’ll get
up at dawn and pluck the flowers that would have blossomed in the creepers,
plants and trees surrounding the house. We’ll make them into beautiful garlands.
Then I’ll go to Thanjavur Thanikulathar Temple and Durga Parameswari Temple
to give those garlands. By that time you can have a bath in the lotus pond in our
garden and help my mother in her daily chores. In the evenings we can draw
water from the pond to water the garden. In the evening I’ll teach you Tamil
songs that are sweeter than the elixir of the celestial world. And if you sing them
with your sweet voice, you’ll feel the sweetness in your tongue. And I’ll feel the
sweetness in my ears. If you like we can visit a few temples in the evening. We
can sing those songs in those temples too. The devotees who visit the temple will
also be happy. Tell me Poonkuzhali, can there be a life sweeter than this?
Happier than this? Think it over, Poonkuzhali.”

Poonkuzhali laughed out aloud.

“Amudha, you described the life which you consider happy. But do you know
what kind of life I want? I want to go to the celestial world and marry the chief
of gods, the Devendra himself. I’ll ride with him in his vehicle, the white
elephant whose name is Iravatham. We’ll ride through the clouds of the celestial
world. I’ll grab the Vajrayutha, Devendra’s weapon, and use it over the clouds
gathered there. When the clouds are hit by that weapon a million flashes of
lightning will be seen on earth. I want to see the sky being rent by those flashes
of lightning. Now if the lightning and thunder strikes the earth it falls on some
distant sea. I won’t waste the thunders. I’ll see to it that the palaces in which the
Princes and Princesses live are directly hit by the lightning and thunder. I will be
laughing when I see those palaces crumbling to the ground.

If Devendra does not want to marry me I’ll approach the Wind God. Even if he

has many wives already I won’t mind becoming his wife. And then there will be
nothing but disaster. There will be storms, cyclones, hurricanes and whirlwinds
on earth all the time. Giant trees will be uprooted by the force of wind and will
fall over palaces and mansions destroying them completely. I’ll unleash cyclones
and storms on the ships on high seas and break them into pieces. The passengers
in those ships will be on high seas and will be struggling for their lives. If there
are princes and princesses among those passengers I’ll make them drown to the
depths of the sea. I’ll have mercy on other passengers and save them. And if the
Wind God refuses to marry me I’ll approach the God of Fire. Then this whole
world will be on fire.”

“Stop, Poonkuzhali. Stop that nonsense. The bitterness in your mind makes you
utter those terrible things. You have not thought over what you have spoken. It’s
a great blunder that I proposed to you now without knowing your state of mind.
Please forgive me. I will pray to God night and day to remove the bitterness in
your heart and give you peace of mind.

Poonkuzhali suddenly stood up. She looked pointedly at a tree on the banks of
the canal. Chendan Amudhan also looked in the same direction. A woman’s face
was seen between the branches. Chendan Amudhan was stunned for a moment
because he could see a strong resemblance to his mother’s face. Then he found
out it was not his mother. He guessed that it must be his aunt - his mother’s
sister. He remembered Poonkuzhali saying that the lady lived in the Ghost Island
near Lanka.

Poonkuzhali jumped from the boat and ran towards the woman.

Chapter 18 - The Arrow

Poonkuzhali saw the Mute Queen hiding behind a tree on the banks of the canal.
Poonkuzhali was a little shocked because she never expected to see the lady near
Kodikkarai. She knew very well that the Mute Queen detested meeting strangers.
‘Oh My God, Chendan Amudhan is with me! Will my aunt run away on seeing
him?’

Poonkuzhali saw her aunt running. She jumped off from the boat. She climbed
up the banks and looked around. She saw her aunt disappearing in the dense
forest.

Chendan Amudhan jumped off the boat and ran up to Poonkuzhali.

“Poonkuzhali! Who was that?”

“Can’t you recognise her, Amudha?”

“I am not very sure. Perhaps... “

“Yes, she is my aunt. My father’s sister. Your mother’s elder sister. The one you
thought had died long ago.”

“Yes, she resembles my mother.”

“Don’t talk rubbish. There is absolutely no similarity between the two women.
Even their qualities are not similar. One is a dumb cow bound to a pole in a
house while the other is a queen amongst lions which roams freely in the
forests.”

“That’s ok. But tell me why did the Lion-Queen run away on seeing you?”

Poonkuzhali laughed

“She ran away on seeing you. She hates strangers.”

“But I am not a stranger.”

“Aunt does not know that yet. If she did she would not have run away. But she’ll
be reluctant to make your acquaintance.”

“What are you going to do now Poonkuzhali?”

“I am going to look out for her.”

“Can I come along?”

“Why?”

“Just to see my mother’s sister and get to know her.”

“Why should you know her?”

Chendan Amudhan knew something about the Mute Queen’s life. He was
curious to meet her. Who knows, perhaps she might help to change
Poonkuzhali’s mind.’

“There are a hundred reasons. But tell me should there be a reason to get to
know one’s own mother’s sister?”

Poonkuzhali thought for a while.

“Ok, come with me. If we go together it’ll be an ordeal to locate her. But I won’t
rest till I meet her. Let’s tie the boat here and go.”

Poonkuzhali secured the boat beneath a dense screw pine bush. Then the two
went towards the dense forest of Kodikkarai.

“Poonkuzhali I remember your saying that she is somewhere in the Ghost
Island.”

“She’ll alternate between Lanka and the Ghost Island.”

“Does she come here often?”

“No. She comes very rarely. If I don’t see her for a long time she’d come here to
see me.”

“Has she come to see you now?”

“Looks like she has come on some other work.”

“What work?”

“Perhaps she has come to know the fate of her foster son, Ponniyin Selvan. She
might probably be anxious to know whether he is alive or he has drowned in the
sea. She should have known about the storm that hit the sea after the Prince’s
ship left the shores.”

“Prince Arulmozhivarman is her foster son? Then who is her own son?”

“I don’t know. But I am not going to stop till I find out.”

“Is her own son alive or dead?”

“Who knows? He might probably be dead.”

They remained silent for some time. Then Poonkuzhali asked him -

“Amudha, you saw your aunt. You said that she resembles your mother. Tell me
whether her face reminds you of somebody else.”

“There’s a vague resemblance. I am not very sure. Looks like the whole thing is
shrouded in mystery.”

“Do you see the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur quite often?”

“Once in a while, Yes. Now I remember. She has a striking resemblance to
Nandini Devi. It’s surprising. How is that possible, Poonkuzhali? And how did
you find it out?”

“I have been seeing my aunt for years. And I saw the Pazhuvur Queen here in
Kodikkarai only a few days ago. The moment I saw her I recognised the strong
resemblance between the faces of the two women.”

“What could possibly be the reason?”

“I am going to find out. I am going to ask her today.”

“But your Aunt can’t speak. How will she answer your question?”

“How do you speak to your mother, Amudha?”

“By sign language. I have been doing it since I was born. Even then to broach a
new subject will be extremely difficult.”

“I too talk to my aunt in sign language. What cannot be communicated by signs
we communicate by drawing pictures.”

“It’s a pity that the two sisters of a family are dumb. I think of their parents. Poor
souls! They must have felt miserable.”

“Not only that, Amudha. When they were young the sisters used to fight a lot.
That was the reason grandfather took the elder sister to the Ghost Island and
settled her there. She was our grandfather’s pet child. When she was born an
astrologer predicted that she would become a queen one day. Grandfather was
excited. But later when he learnt that she was dumb he was devastated.”

They had entered the forest. They could not locate the Mute Queen.

“Amudha, we could not find her because of you. She thinks you as a stranger
and is trying to hide herself.”

“Ok, I am not lucky. Whatever I plan never happens. Can I go now?”

“How will you go, Amudha? I’ll have to guide you out of the forest.”

They heard a strange voice from the forest. That was neither a human voice nor
that of an animal. The voice was heard two, three times. A few deer ran towards
the direction of the voice.

Poonkuzhali thought for a while.

“Amudha follow me without making any noise.”

They started walking towards the direction of the voice. They saw a strange
scene there.

The mute queen was leaning against the trunk of a tree. She had a few tender
leaves on her hand. She was surrounded by seven or eight deer. There was a
competition among the animals to eat the leaves in her hand. A deer calf was
sitting on her shoulder eagerly looking at her face.

Poonkuzhali and Amudhan froze in their places. The deer-calf on the lady’s
shoulder was the first one to see them. It jumped down from the lady’s shoulder.
Meanwhile the other deer saw them. The deer were ready to flee if the two
decided to come any closer. The Mute Queen also saw the pair. Another strange
voice came from her mouth. The deer ran away from the place.

“My aunt does not know the language spoken by the people. But she knows the
language used by these animals.” There was pride in Poonkuzhali’s voice.

The lady did not run away now. She returned Poonkuzhali’s signal. When
Poonkuzhali went near her she hugged her and kissed on her forehead. Chendan
Amudhan was still standing at a distance.

The aunt and her niece spoke for a while in sign language. Then Poonkuzhali
asked Amudhan to come near.

The mute queen looked at Amudhan. She then placed her hand on his head as if
to bless him. Then she withdrew her hand. She then grabbed Poonkuzhali’s hand
and dragged her away from that place. Amudhan followed them.

The three reached the banks of the canal. The Mute Queen sat on the bank and
waved her hands to Poonkuzhali.

“Come, Amudha, let’s go. She says she won’t come. She wants her food to be
brought here.”

They both started walking towards the light house.

“What’s your answer to my question, Poonkuzhali?”

“I had an idea of coming to Thanjavur with you. But that’s not possible now. My
aunt wants to see her dear foster son. So I have to take her to Nagapattinam. If
you come she might run away. I can’t get to know those things which I badly
wanted to know.”

Chendhan Amudhan let out a long sigh.

“Lady Luck has been avoiding me. Let me take leave of you now.”

“No, no. Come with me. To my house. Have your food, talk to your uncle and
take leave of him. Otherwise they’ll shout at me.”

On the way they saw a man and a woman hiding behind a bush discussing
something very serious.

“Oh My God, that’s my sister-in-law, Rakkammal. Looks like her secret parleys
are not yet over. Who is she talking to now? Are they the same spies from the
Pandya Kingdom? Or somebody else?”

Poonkuzhali was talking to herself.

Rakkammal emerged from behind the bush. She was a trifle shocked on seeing
Poonkuzhali. But she hid her feelings and almost ran up to them.

“Poonkuzhali, where were you all these days? Your father and your brother were

very much worried.”

“Why should they? This is not the first time I am going out of the house.”

“But this time you took your cousin along. They were worried whether you two
had a secret marriage.”

“Anni, I have warned you several times not to utter such foolish things in my
presence. If you do it again... well you had it.”

“No, not at all, my dear. You can marry your cousin or the Prince. Who the hell
cares? Your aunt came from Lanka looking for you? Did you see her?”

“No. I did not.”

Poonkuzhali had a minute’s time to talk privately to Amudhan before they
reached her house.

“Careful, Amudha. Anni is a part of the spy ring of Pandya Kingdom. She’ll try
to pull out the words from your mouth. Be very careful. Don’t answer any of her
questions. Tell her you don’t know anything.”

“Let me also be dumb so long as I am here in your house.”

The same afternoon Poonkuzhali was rowing her boat towards Nagapattinam.
The Mute Queen was the only other passenger in the boat. Poonkuzhali always
used to be peaceful and at times even blissful while in the company of the Mute
Queen. But this time Poonkuzhali was not.

She remembered taking a sick Ponniyin Selvan in her boat only a few days ago.
The memory of that trip came quite often. Now she felt that she took all the
trouble only to unite the Prince with another Princess. She felt a sharp pain in her
heart.

She also felt bad for Chendan Amudhan. She had almost driven him away to his
place. Her heart melted when she realised that she had been quite heartless with
her cousin.

More disturbing than these thoughts were the words of her father, Thiyaga
Vidangaraiyar. Those were not words but warnings.

“My dear child, it’ll be prudent if you can control your movements especially
during these troubled times. I see new faces coming here quite often. I don’t
know why they come here. I infer some conspiracy is being hatched in our
Kingdom. I don’t want you to be caught in the net of conspirators. Our family is
forever indebted to the family of the Chozha Kings. Never ever forget this, my
child.”

When Poonkuzhali connected her father’s words and the clandestine activities of
her sister-in-law her body trembled in fear. ‘Perhaps those strangers came
looking out for me. Perhaps they want to know where Ponniyin Selvan is by
following me. Oh My God, that would amount to compromising on his security.
It’d be a great crime.’

The rustling sound heard near the banks increased her fears. There was no wind
at that time. It appeared as if all the elements of Nature were conspiring to block
the wind. In the absence of wind what would have caused that rustling sound?
The mute queen was not disturbed as she could not hear any sound. There was
no point in discussing that sound with her.

But the other senses of the mute queen were abnormally sharper. She could use
her eyes and brain to know what other people knew by their ears. And so long as
she was there no danger can ensue to Poonkuzhali.

But what’s happening? Even my aunt looks disturbed. She is anxiously looking at
the banks of the canal. Is somebody following us?

The reason for the mute queen looking at the banks with concern soon became
clear to Poonkuzhali. And she felt relieved.

There were about five or six deer in a place hidden in the bushes on the bank.
They were peeping to look at the boat. No, not at the boat but at the Mute Queen.
No other animal was as beautiful as deer. Why did God create men after creating
such beautiful creatures like deer? Men are devils. There were men who were
fond of hunting such beautiful animals! It was a shame on humanity.

Poonkuzhali was absorbed in the beauty of the deer. Her hands stopped rowing.

A strange sound came from the mute queen. That was not like the sound
Poonkuzhali heard from her in the morning. There was immense fear and a sense

of caution in the sound now. The deer heard the sound and started running away
from the scene. At the same time an arrow came from nowhere and landed on
one of the deer. The injured deer let out a pathetic wail. The mute queen jumped
from the boat and ran towards the deer.

As she came near the deer there was a rustling of leaves all around her. In the
next few seconds she was surrounded by seven or eight men. They were armed
with spears.

Rakkammal, Poonkuzhali’s sister-in-law who had guided them to the place was
seen at a distance.

The mute queen tried to run away. She could not. When she learnt that all her
escape routes were cut off she stood still.

Two men came near her and bound her with ropes.

All these happened in a few seconds in the sight of Poonkuzhali.

When Poonkuzhali saw the Mute Queen being bound by those men she sprang
from the boat and came running to the place screaming. She was using the oar as
a weapon.

Five or six men ran towards Poonkuzhali. They caught hold of her and dragged
her to her boat. She was thrown into the boat and was bound by ropes. The men
then went away. The Mute Queen followed them submissively. They all

vanished from the place in a few seconds.

Chapter 19 - The Laughter And The Fire

Poonkuzhali was struggling hard to release herself from the ropes that bound her
to her boat. That was not an easy task. The crooks had tied the rope several times
over and had made several knots. Poonkuzhali’s knife was lying on the boat
floor. If only one of her hands were free she could have used it to take the knife
and cut off the ropes. But those evil men had secured her wrists tightly to her
back and then to the boat. Poonkuzhali strained herself to bend and grab the
knife with her mouth. While holding the knife in her mouth she cut the rope at
one point. The grip over one of her hands loosened. With great effort she freed
one hand. Then it was pretty easy to free her completely.

It took more than thirty minutes for her to free herself from the ropes. She heard
the sound of footsteps. Then she saw a moving shadow. She thought that one of
the captors had been left behind to make sure that she did not escape. The
moment the person appeared before her she decided to throw the sharp knife at
him and kill him. But what a disappointment!

“Poonkuzhali! Poonkuzhali”

It was Chendan Amudhan’s voice. The next moment his terror-stricken face
appeared on the banks.

Poonkuzhali secured the knife in her waist. Amudhan too had seen her.

“Poonkuzhali, are you alive?” - He came running towards her.

“Why, you don’t want to see me alive? Do me a favour, please. Kill me with
your own hands. But I know you are too timid to do that.”

“Oh My God! Why are you so harsh, Poonkuzhali? Why should I kill you? You
are now killing me with your words.”

“Why didn’t you come a little earlier? You’ll never know how much I suffered to
free myself from these bloody ropes.”

Poonkuzhali tried to stand. But as her legs were tangled in a maze of ropes she
was about to trip. Amudhan rushed to her side and held her in his arms.

“Oh My God, see what those crooks have done to you! I can see the rope marks
all over your body.”

“If you are really concerned about me why didn’t you come a little earlier?”

“You have been asking the same question again and again. How could I know
that you were in danger? You almost drove me away with your words. I was on
the way to my town.”

“Then why did you come back? Perhaps to see if I am dead and perform the
funeral?”

“Legend says that my Lord Shiva had poison in his throat. And you have it on
your tongue. Your sister-in-law told me that you might possibly be in danger. So
I came running. And I have been amply rewarded for what I have done.”

Poonkuzhali had come to the bank by now.

“I was about to throw this knife on you. You escaped. The first thing I am going
to do is to kill my sister-in-law with this knife. Where is that devil?”

“Why are you pouncing on that woman? Why are you so furious with her? Is it
an offence to ask me to help you out of danger?”

“No. She’s the one who betrayed my aunt. You also saw her talking to somebody
hiding behind the bushes.”

“You are wrong, Poonkuzhali. I don’t know who she was talking to. But one
thing is for sure. She did not betray your aunt. Those crooks who forcibly
abducted your aunt had tied your sister-in-law to a tree. They also hit her on her
head. She is badly hurt.”

“That’s strange! I can’t believe that! Looks like she has deceived you. But tell
me why did you come back? Where did you see my sister-in-law? I want to
know everything.”

Chendan Amudhan started a long narration.

Chendan Amudhan was reluctantly walking on the road to Thanjavur. He did not
have the heart to go away from Poonkuzhali.

He heard somebody screaming from the forest near the road. He could also hear
the sound of footsteps. Chendan Amudhan hid behind a tree on the road side.
About seven or eight soldiers, all wielding spears, walked into the highway from
the forest. Amudhan remembered to have seen a woman in their midst. The lady
appeared like Poonkuzhali’s aunt. Amudhan first thought that it was only a
hallucination.

After the soldiers had gone away he heard a woman screaming for help. The
scream came from the forest. His first instinct was not to get involved in what
was possibly a crime scene. He wanted to ignore the call for help and go on his
way. But then he decided to help the lady in distress and went in the direction of
the sound.

He saw Rakkammal bound to a tree. Blood was oozing from her head making
her face a bloody mess. Amudhan was frightened. He did not have the heart to
go near her. After some time he hardened himself and approached the woman.
He freed her. As he was taking off the ropes he bombarded her with questions:

‘Who did this? And why? Who were the men who just walked up to the highway
from here? There was a woman in their midst. Who is she?

“Yes, Amudha. They are kidnapping your aunt. I tried my best to prevent it.
That’s why they beat me up and tied me to this tree. Your cousin, Poonkuzhali
and your aunt were going in the boat. These men dragged your aunt from the
boat. I don’t know what happened to Poonkuzhali. Please run. Otherwise it may
be too late...”

Chendhan Amudhan was shocked. He started to run.

“Just a minute, Thambi. Do you by any chance know where Poonkuzhali and
that dumb devil were going? And why did they not take you with them? Where
are you going alone, now?”

Amudhan did not like the way she talked. Especially the way she referred to his
aunt as ‘dumb devil.’ “Will tell you later.” Amudhan muttered and ran towards
the canal. His heart was in his mouth. What would have happened to
Poonkuzhali? Would they have beaten her up? Or killed her?

He heaved a sigh of relief when he saw Poonkuzhali alive and unharmed.

“Now tell me Poonkuzhali, weren’t you wrong in accusing your sister-in-law?”

“Seems so. Where did you leave her? Let’s go there now.”

“Will she be there now?”

“She must be in the vicinity. Or she might come looking for us. Didn’t she ask
where my aunt and I were headed to?”

“Yes, she did.”

“I hope you did not answer her question. Are you sure?”

“I am. Since she referred to my Periamma as ‘dumb devil’ I was disgusted with
her and did not have the mind to respond to her question.”

“Take it from me, even if she were to ask in all nice words, don’t tell her
anything. Do you know why she is keen to know our destination? I don’t know;
but I am sure she must have her reasons. I am not sure about her innocence. The
crooks might have got the information through my sister-in-law and once their
purpose was served they might have beaten her up and abandoned her. Even if
that were not true she must have followed us with some evil intentions. So be
careful with her. Don’t let her deceive you.”

“Poonkuzhali, I remember your saying that your brother acts dumb in the
presence of his wife. Well, I’ll do the same. You do all the talking.”

Poonkuzhali laughed.

“The sound of your laugh is like sweet honey to my ears. It appears as if I am
hearing the sweet songs on my Lord composed by the great saint
Thirunavukkarasar.”

“Well, my laughing was just an inadvertent act. Don’t’ be carried away by that.
My mind is still boiling. A fire is raging in my heart.”

“There is no better way to quell that fire than my Lord’s love.”

Chapter 20 - The Doctor’s Son Once Again

Poonkuzhali and Chendan Amudhan were walking through the forest. They were
enveloped in a screen of uncomfortable silence.

Poonkuzhali let out a long sigh and spoke in a soft voice.

“Amudha, perhaps there’s something between us. We must have known each
other in our previous births as well.”

“I am least concerned about our previous births. I’ll be grateful if you can give a
favourable answer for something regarding this birth.”

“They say that the relationship two people shared in an earlier birth will continue
in the next one as well. That must be true, Amudha. When we parted ways this
afternoon I thought I will never see you again. But it was so ordained that we
had to meet again within fifty minutes.”

“You need not grieve on that account. Once we cross this forest and reach the
Thanjavur Highway I’ll go my way. You are free to do whatever you like.”

“I am not going to leave you like that, Amudha. After talking to my sister-in-law
I’ll come with you to Thanjavur. I am going to seek justice for my aunt. I am
going to complain at the Emperor’s Court.”

“Poonkuzhali, do you still think it’s easy to approach the Emperor? Lay people
like us cannot even enter the Fort, let alone the King’s Court.”

“Why not? If they refuse to open the Fort gates I’ll break them open. And if that
is not possible I’ll scale the wall and jump in.”

“What will you do with the security guards on duty at the entrance of the Fort?”

“They will be simply frightened by my screams. They’ll take me to the
Emperor.”

“I don’t think so, Poonkuzhali. You can’t easily frighten the person in charge of
the Fort’s security - I mean the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. People say that without
the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s permission even the Lord of Death cannot enter the
Fort. Some even say that the Emperor is still alive because of that.”

“What if I can’t see the Emperor? I’ll see the Pazhuvettaraiyars and seek justice
for my aunt. And if I don’t get justice there I’ll run to the Chief Minister
Aniruddha Brahmarayar. And if I fail to get justice there I’ll run to Pazhaiyaarai
and complain to the Queens. I won’t rest till I know what happened to my aunt. I
won’t sleep till she gets justice. Didn’t my sister-in-law say that my aunt is a
‘dumb devil’? Well, I’ll become a devil and roam in the cities and villages of this
Kingdom. I will be crying ‘Justice’ ‘Justice’ as I wander in the country. Amudha,
will you be me with in this?”

“Sure, Poonkuzhali, but only if you want me to come. But honestly why should

you let your mind swayed by emotions? You have gone way too far. Your first
priority is to find where your aunt is and save her from danger. To free her from
her evil captors. Shouldn’t you tell your father and brother about this?”

“Amudha, my aunt has divine powers. Nobody can harm her. Like the legendary
Dhamayanthi who burnt the hunter with her powers she could burn her enemies
by her mere glance. I am not worried about her. But I can’t bear to see such a
gross atrocity happening in broad daylight in Chozha Kingdom. People say
Paranthaka’s reign is one of righteousness. Ours is a country which was once
ruled by the great devotee of Lord Shiva, Kandaraathithar. The tiger and the cow
used to drink from the same pond. We have been living in that kind of peace and
glory. Our Government is boasting that in Sundara Chozhan’s rule even a young
woman can walk alone at night without any fear for her safety. Ours is such a
glorious country. And in that country if criminals can abduct an old woman who
can neither speak nor hear in broad day light, well to me, that’s the greatest of
crimes ever committed in this country. I am not that concerned about my aunt.
But whatever happened to her today can happen to me tomorrow. And can
happen to any young woman living in this country.

Chendan Amudhan spoke:

“Yes, we are surrounded by dangers at present. Ever since Sundara Chozhan
became bedridden evil has gained an upper hand. Justice and righteousness have
vanished. The ordinary men and women are not safe. And for the young girls of
this country danger is waiting for them at every street corner. My suggestion to
the young women of this country is “get married to the right man soon.”

Poonkuzhali laughed.

“Amudha, if a young woman marries you, can you protect her? Do you know

how to handle a sword? Do you know how to fight?”

“I only know how to make a garland of flowers. I only know how to sing the
praises of my Lord. I have not learnt the art of fighting with a sword. So what?
Didn’t you teach me how to row a boat? In the same way I’ll learn to fight.
When Madhuranthakan can have the ambition of ruling this country, my learning
to handle a sword is not so difficult a task.”

By that time, they had reached the place where Poonkuzhali’s sister-in-law was
bound to a tree. They could not find her there. Amudhan showed the blood spots
to Poonkuzhali suggesting that the blood might have come from the woman’s
head.

“It seems they have roughed her up. I am now sure that my sister-in-law was not
working for the gang who abducted by aunt. But we should somehow know who
she is working for.”

“Please listen to me, Poonkuzhali. Whatever has happened appears quite
mysterious. Looks like there are secrets within secrets. All these complications
involve the King and his family. Why should we bother about all these things?
Why should we invite danger?”

“Amudha, let it be a sensitive political issue. Let it be a deep mystery. But tell
me how can I stand off from something involving my aunt? And she’s your
mother’s sister as well. How can you distance yourself from her?”

“I’m speaking what’s there in my mind, Poonkuzhali. Didn’t I tell you about the
seven or eight men walking on the road and a woman walking with them in the

centre? Well, judging by the way she walked I don’t think that she has been
abducted. It appears as if she was willingly going with them. I don’t think that
she is forcibly taken.”

“Possible, Amudha. That is also possible. But that’s my aunt’s nature. She might
want to know where she is being taken. And if she doesn’t like she can escape
even from a thousand men. She can’t be imprisoned even in the mightiest of
Forts and the worst underground dungeons. That was why I said that I am not
concerned about her safety. My mission is to correct the injustice meted out to
her. No, I am not talking about what happened today, but what happened twenty
five years ago. That was the greatest injustice committed against a woman. I
won’t rest till I seek retribution for that.”

“Oh My God! You’ve let your mind drift towards an impossible task.” Amudhan sighed.

They heard somebody talking. One of the voices belonged to a woman.
Amudhan and Poonkuzhali saw those who were talking at the Thanjavur High
Road.

One was Poonkuzhali’s sister-in-law Rakkammal. The person whom she was
talking to was the son of the Chief Doctor of Pazhaiyaarai. Poonkuzhali was
disgusted on seeing that worm.

Rakkammal saw Poonkuzhali.

“Oh, you are safe! I thought that they might have killed you. See, what those
crooks have done to me! All because I tried to save your aunt! I was asking for

some medicine from the Doctor’s son.”

“Even if the Karaiyar’s daughter is hurt I am ready to treat her.” - The Doctor’s
son blurted out.

Poonkuzhali did not respond to his offer. Instead she asked her sister-in-law:

“Anni, do you where the abductors are taking my aunt? Tell me which direction
they took.”

“I didn’t see. But this Doctor’s son says that they went in the direction of
Thanjavur High Road.”

“Anni, Amudhan and I are going to look for her. Please tell my father. Come,
Amudha, let’s go.”

Poonkuzhali started to move.

The Doctor’s son spoke to her.

“Stop, Poonkuzhali. You two can’t go after them. They have horses which were
waiting for them at a short distance from here. They would have ridden from
there. I have a horse with me. I can chase them at the speed of wind and then
come back to tell you about their whereabouts. And in return I want a small help
from you. Just tell me where your aunt and you were headed for when the crooks

captured her.

Poonkuzhali spoke to her sister-in-law.

“Anni, we do not need his help. We’ll find them on our own. Just tell my father.”

The Doctor’s son was quite adamant.

“Aha, see the pride of Karaiyar’s daughter! She does not need my help. Girl,
why are you so furious with me? Did I prevent you from marrying the Prince?
You deceived me and took that man from Vaana Clan Vandhiya Thevan on your
boat. And he killed the Prince by pushing him into the sea. What’s the point in
being angry with me?”

The Doctor’s son laughed.

There was fire in Poonkuzhali’s eyes when she stared at him. She then grabbed
Amudhan’s hand and started walking up ahead. When she was out of their
hearing range she told Amudhan, “When you first learn to fight with a sword
you should kill this crook, the Doctor’s son. He should be the first victim of your
sword, Amudha.”

They walked day and night on the road to Thanjavur. They asked the people on
the way if any of them had seen seven or eight men going on horses along with a
woman. They did have some information to start with. But after some time they
were stonewalled. Everybody had witnessed that strange sight; but nobody could

say who were they and where were they headed. They decided to go to
Thanjavur anyway.

Chendan Amudhan found the travel quite interesting. Poonkuzhali was the main
reason. Another reason was that he trained himself on using the sword. He
bought a sword near Kodikkarai from a blacksmith known to Poonkuzhali.
While walking on the road he was constantly swirling the sword as if he were
fighting with an enemy. His lack of training showed in the haphazard way he
turned around the sword. At those times Poonkuzhali taught him how to hold a
sword and how to wield it against an enemy. The training session made the
travelling experience memorable to both.

Only when they saw the Thanjavur Fort at a distance Poonkuzhali became
serious. Chendan Amudhan shared her concern. Even to enter the Fort was a
feat; how were they going to take their prayer for justice to high places?
Amudhan remembered the tricks played by Vandhiya Thevan in a similar
situation.

Should I not have at least a tenth of his smartness? How good it would have
been if Vandhiya Thevan is here with me to guide me in this critical mission.

If Vandhiya Thevan is caught in a situation like this, what will he do? How will
he act?

They saw a closed palanquin going to the Fort. The sun had just set and a
blanket of darkness was being slowly spread over them. There were pictures of
palm tree on the screen that covered the palanquin.

‘Oh My God! This seems to be the palanquin of the Junior Queen. If only we
could get her signet ring, all our problems will be solved.’

Amudhan shared his thoughts with Poonkuzhali. ‘Not a bad idea’ Poonkuzhali
told him.

But how was he going to draw the attention of the Junior Queen who was inside
the closed palanquin? There were armed guards in front of the vehicle as well as
in the back. The guards might not even let him go near the palanquin.

“Don’t worry, Amudha the Fort is still a mile away. We’ll have enough
opportunities.”

And they got a wonderful opportunity in the most unexpected manner.

Chapter 21 - The Palanquin Ride

The arrival of the monsoon was delayed that year. The rains appeared to start
but they never did. There were a couple of false starts and the dry weather
continued. The water flow in Cauvery and its tributaries had considerably gone
down.

The farmers had planted hoping for a good monsoon. The saplings were about to
wither for want of rains. “It’s all because of that evil comet” - people shifted the
blame to the inanimate comet.

“The Kingdom is in a mess.”

“The political affairs are in a state of confusion.”

“No news about the Prince.”

“And now the rains have failed us.”

Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali were hearing this refrain throughout their
journey.

Of course the absence of rains made their travel faster and more comfortable.

The days were clear. The afternoons were sultry. Even while walking under the
shady trees of the highway they sweated.

“Doesn’t look like the rainy month of Aippasi. It appears as if we are in the
middle of summer - in the month of Vaikasi.”

Soon after the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palanquin passed by their side they
experienced a cool breeze. The leaves on the trees rustled in the wind creating a
pleasant noise. They could see dark clouds in the north eastern horizon. In a
short time the clouds were rushing towards them as if they were a herd of
elephants on the run.

The breeze became a strong wind and then a gale. The wind carried small
droplets of water which fell on them. It started with a drizzle. And then it
became a torrential downpour. It was difficult to describe the plight of the
roadside trees in the wind and rain. The branches broke down. The birds which
had nested in the branches flew in all the directions. The people walking on the
road ran for cover.

Some were afraid of the wind and the rain and so they started to run. Others
were afraid of the tree branches falling over their heads. They too ran. Some
feared that that it was the onset of the apocalypse and hence ran away in mortal
fear. The day faded into night. Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali abandoned
the thought of entering the Thanjavur Fort before nightfall.

They decided to go to Chendan Amudhan’s garden outside the city limits. They
walked on the streets carefully providing support to one another.

“Poonkuzhali, you must have seen many a storm and rain in the high seas. You
have rowed your boat in the middle of huge mountains. I am surprised to see you
afraid of this rain.”

“However strong may be the storm or the rain, when you are in the middle of the
sea no tree will fall on your head. At the most you might be struck by a
lightning.”

Even as Poonkuzhali was talking they could hear a tree crashing at a distance.
Amudhan gripped Poonkuzhali’s hands and stopped at that place.

“There is no point in going further in this weather. There are some mandapams
on the road side. Let’s stay in one of them till the weather gets better.”

“Agreed! But how do we find a mandapam in this darkness?”

“We have the lightning to guide us. We will have to see on both the sides very
carefully.”

Very soon there was a lightning. It bathed the sky and the earth in glorious light.

“I can see a mandapam there!”

Poonkuzhali too saw the structure. She also saw a huge tree that had just fallen
down. It appeared as if some people were caught under the tree.

“Amudha, did you see the fallen tree? Can you see beneath the tree.. “

“Yes, I did. Fast. Let’s run to the mandapam, otherwise we’ll also be trapped.”

He held her hand and ran towards the building.

They reached the mandapam soon. They squeezed the water from their dresses.
Poonkuzhali tried to dry her long hair. The water from their dresses ran through
the building.

“God, we have made the place wet.”

“That’s okay, Poonkuzhali. The mandapam won’t be hurt. I don’t think it’d have
cold or fever because of this running water. You are fully drenched.”

“I was born and brought up in the sea. I have another name, Samudra Kumari.
The rain water cannot harm me.”

Her mind leapt from that road-side mandapam to the Choodamani Monastery of
Nagapattinam. The person who first called her ‘Samudra Kumari’ was in the
monastery.

“Poonkuzhali my garden and hut is quite near. As soon as the rain abates we’ll

go there. My mother will take good care of you.”

Poonkuzhali did not hear Amudhan’s words fully.

There was a flash of lightning. They were shocked by what they saw. A big
banyan tree had fallen down at a place almost opposite to the mandapam. Its
branches and aerial roots were everywhere. Two horses and about five or six
people were trapped under the fallen tree. A few others were trying to rescue
those people. They were trying to remove the branches. “Here” “There” “Fast”
“Aiyoo”, “Oh My God” - the sound of rain was punctuated by the sounds heard
from the place.

But something else caught the attention of Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali.
There was a palanquin on the ground near the fallen tree. Two men were
standing guard for the palanquin. The rest were perhaps involved in the rescue
operations.

“Amudha, did you see the palanquin?”

“Yes, I did. Looks like the palanquin of the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur.”

“It would have been better if the tree had fallen on the palanquin.”

“Oh My God! Why are you saying that? Didn’t you say that you wanted to meet
the Pazhuvur Queen and get things done through her?”

“Yes, I did. But I don’t like that woman.”

“If you don’t like somebody then a tree should fall on them, right?”

“Should trees fall only on ordinary people? Should it not fall on queens and
princesses? That’s ok. Shall we go to the palanquin and speak to the Pazhuvur
Queen? Shall we seek her help to enter the fort?”

“You have chosen the best time to see her. If we go near the palanquin now we
might be mistaken as robbers and might be beaten up by the guards.”

“If only I am able to see her then things will be easy.”

“How?”

“I’ll drop my sister-in-law’s name. Or tell her that the sorcerer Ravidasan sent
me.”

“Good idea. But how are we going to go near her?”

There was a flash of lightning. They saw two men lifting the palanquin.

Oh My God, have they started? No, no. Looks like the palanquin is coming here.

In a few seconds the palanquin reached the entrance of the mandapam. The
bearers gently placed it on the floor.

“Perhaps the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur is looking for us.” - Poonkuzhali.

Amudhan gripped her hand and tried to move further inside. Poonkuzhali
resisted his move.

There was a commanding voice - “Who’s there?”

Poonkuzhali knew that the voice belonged to one of the bearers.

“Don’t worry, brother. We too are travellers like you. We too have come here
because of the rains.”

“Ok. But don’t come near the palanquin.”

“Why should we do that, brother? One has to have some good fortune to ride in
a palanquin.” - Poonkuzhali answered him.

Amudhan too joined the conversation.

“While talking about the good deeds in the past the great poet Thiruvalluvar has
spoken about riding in a palanquin.”

“Enough. Keep your mouths shut. How many of you are there?”

“We are only two. But this mandapam can hold even two hundred.”

Amudhan told what he believed to be true. He did not know that there was a
third person in the mandapam hiding behind one of the pillars.

The palanquin bearer spoke to his companion.

“I told them, you know. That we can take shelter in the mandapam when the
rains came. They did not listen. If they did this would not have happened.”

“Who knew this will happen? We thought that we can reach the Fort before the
rains became stronger. Thank God, the tree did not fall on the palanquin.”

There was another flash of lighting. The eyes of Amudhan and Poonkuzhali did
not move away from the palanquin. They could see a woman in the palanquin.
She moved away the screen to have a look at them. She recognized them and
smiled.

The next moment the place plunged into darkness.

Poonkuzhali spoke almost in a whisper.

“Did you see, Amudha?”

“Yes.”

“Did you see who’s in the palanquin?”

“Is it not the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur?”

“What do you think?”

“Looks like the Pazhuvur Queen. But I am doubtful.”

“But I don’t have any doubts. I am very sure.”

“Sure of what?”

“It’s not the Queen of Pazhuvur. It’s my aunt, the Mute Queen.”

“Sh.. don’t shout.”

“Unless I shout it won’t happen.”

“What should happen?”

“The one for which we came all the way. We have now found our aunt.
Shouldn’t we rescue her and take her back?”

“That’s impossible, Poonkuzhali. We’ll follow the palanquin and find its
destination. Then we can plan our rescue operations.”

“Why are you beating around the bush? I am not for it. I want to get her released
right now. If you are afraid you keep quiet.”

“But Poonkuzhali your aunt should be willing to be released. It appears as if she
is going on her own free will, majestically riding in a palanquin. Where is she
going? What for? Who ordered her capture? Should we not know the answers to
all these questions?”

“Maybe she is being taken to the underground dungeons. Once she is imprisoned
there we can’t do anything.”

“Why not? I was in those dungeons once and I came out. I do have some
influence in the Palaces in Thanjavur. I’ll try to get your aunt released. Keep

quiet now.”

Poonkuzhali wanted to be patient. She did not want to do anything. But
something unexpected happened.

The screens of the palanquin moved apart. A figure came out. It walked like a
cat without making any noise. The next second it was near them. As all this
happened in total darkness it escaped the eyes of the bearers and guards.
Poonkuzhali knew for sure that it was the Mute Queen. The Mute Queen held
the hands of Amudhan and Poonkuzhali and dragged them to the back of the
mandapam.

She then hugged Poonkuzhali and kissed on her forehead to express her
happiness. The aunt and niece talked for a while in sign language. How could
they do that in utter darkness? How could they communicate to each other? That
was something beyond explanation.

Poonkuzhali then spoke to Amudhan.

“Can you understand what she says? She wants me to go in the palanquin. She
wants you to take her to your place.”

“What do you think, Poonkuzhali?”

“That seems to be a good idea. We’ll know the identity of her captors.”

“Think it over, Poonkuzhali. Yes, it’s a good idea. But is it not very risky?”

“Don’t worry, Amudha. I won’t be harmed. I have this knife in my waist. I’ll
take care.”

Poonkuzhali hugged her aunt and took leave of her. And like her aunt she
walked like a cat silently towards the palanquin. She got into the palanquin and
pulled in the screens.

Chapter 22 - Chief Minister Aniruddhar Disappointed

Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar had been camping in the capital for a
few days. His Palace was buzzing with activity. Government officials,
Chieftains, Generals, Foreign Ambassadors, Representatives of Traders’ Groups,
Trustees of Temples, Tamil and Sanskrit scholars swarmed to his Palace to have
private audience with him.

The Chief Minister did not have any security guards for him. He kept his official
retinue to the barest minimum. That minimized the possible friction between the
Chief Minister and the Pazhuvettaraiyars.

Even then the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was not happy about the Chief Minister
extending his stay in the Capital. He thought that the security arrangements were
a little lax ever since the Minister arrived in the city. All and sundry made their
way into the Fort on the pretext of seeing the Chief Minister. The Chief
Minister’s palace was adjacent to the King’s main Palace and the crowd in the
Ministers palace seeped over to the main palace. Of course Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar, though the official commander of the Fort’s security, could not
prevent anybody who had the Chief Minister’s signet ring, from entering the
Minister’s palace.

The Junior was not at all happy with the state of affairs. He did not have the
courage to confront the Chief Minister and sort out the matters with him. If his
brother, the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar were there in the city, the two brothers
would have discussed the issue and would have found a smart solution. But
unfortunately the Senior had gone to Kadambur. Without his elder brother the
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, also known as Kalaanthaka Kandar, felt that one of his
hands had been taken away. And as if to add fuel to the fire the Chief Minister
was frequently sending orders to the Junior in the pretext of seeking his help in

administration.

A few days ago the Chief Minister wanted some soldiers to be sent to Kodikkarai
for some important work. The Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar obliged. And the previous
day the Minister wanted the closed Palanquin of the Pazhuvur Palace along with
the bearers to bring a lady of high rank to his Palace. The Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar complied with this request as well.

But he started thinking.

‘The Minister is involved in some conspiracy. Who is the high society woman
who has to be brought in the closed palanquin? And why is she brought here? I
should find that out. What a pity! My brother is not here at this time! How am I
going to handle this situation?’

Along with the Pazhuvettaraiyar another person was also keen on knowing the
identity of the woman who was being brought to Aniruddhar’s Palace - the Chief
Minister’s most trusted disciple, Azhwarkkadian.

On the day after the heavy rains the Chief Minister got up early, finished his
ablutions, had his breakfast and came to the entrance of his Palace. He sent a
man to find out who were waiting to see him.

When he heard that Azhwarkkadian was one among them he ordered to bring
him right away. Azhwarkkadian stood before his mentor with all reverence and
humility.

“Thirumalai, what happened to your mission?”

“Failure, Master.”

“I expected that. Were you able to meet the Crown Prince?”

“I did meet him, Master. I told him whatever you wanted me to tell him. But
they were of no use, Master. I couldn’t prevent the Crown Prince from visiting
the Kadambur Palace.”

“Is the Prince still in Kadambur?”

“Yes, Master. I saw him entering Sambuvaraiyar’s palace and then came back.
The Prince was accorded a grand reception. I don’t have words to describe the
enthusiasm of the villagers who assembled on the occasion.”

“I expected. Who else have come to the Kadambur Palace?”

“Parthibendran and Vandhiya Thevan have come along with the Prince. Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar and his queen have gone from here. I heard that the Chieftains
from the Middle Provinces and Thirumunaippadi region have been invited.”

“What about Thirukkovilur Malaiyaman?”

“He accompanied the Prince till Manimutha River. And then went back.”

“The old man can’t keep quiet. He would have started gathering an army by
now. I hear that the Kodumbalur Chieftain has gathered a huge army and is
marching towards the Capital from South. God should save this country from
danger. Thirumalai, did you hear what the people of the Chozha Kingdom are
talking about?”

“They are talking mainly about the drowning accident involving the younger
Prince. They are furious over Pazhuvettaraiyars. Some are even blaming you,
Master.”

“They are after all right. I deserve the blame. I am planning to resign my
Minister’s job.”

“Master that would be a grand release for me! I’ll then travel to all the places
singing the compositions of Azhwars. I’ll lead a happy, care-free life. Tell me,
Master, when are you going to quit?

“I am planning one last time to save this country from danger. I’ll quit my post
soon after that.”

“What are you going to do, Master?”

“The first step of my plan has already been executed. Thirumalai you should
know that I have succeeded in a task which you said is impossible for you.”

“That’s no surprise, Master. But what’s the task, Master?”

“Didn’t I ask you to bring the crazy, dumb woman roaming in the Lankan
islands? But you said that you can’t do it.”

“Yes, I did, Master. The dumb lady…. “

“I brought her to my palace yesterday night.”

“That’s nothing short of a miracle, Master. But how did you do it?”

“I expected that dumb lady would come to Kodikkarai to know if the younger
Prince survived the storm. I had sent men to capture her if she resisted. Thank
God, she did not give much trouble. She let herself to be brought here. And
Thirumalai you are not going to believe this. I had her brought from
Thiruvaiyaaru in the closed palanquin belonging to the Junior Queen of
Pazhuvur.”

“But, Master, there were heavy rains yesterday and possibly a storm too?”

“Yes. That delayed her journey. I was worried. It was only after the palanquin
reached the Palace at midnight did I heave a sigh of relief.”

“Oh it was midnight when she came? And you were up, Master, till that time to
accord a rousing reception to her?”

“Yes, I was awake. But I did not go to receive her. I made the womenfolk of the
Palace receive her. I knew she was a crazy woman. I was worried that she might
fight with me. Thank God nothing of that sort happened. She ate well and soon
slept. Thirumalai, to confess the truth, I am still afraid to see her. Thank God,
you came at the right time. We can see her together.”

“Master, I too am eager to see her.”

“Then come, let’s go to the ladies’ chambers. I presume that the lady knows you
already. She also knows that you are dear to the younger Prince. She might have
a soft corner for you.”

The Master and the disciple walked to the ladies’ chambers. The Minister
ordered the maids to bring in the woman who came in the previous night.

The maids brought in the lady.

Aniruddha Brahmarayar was shocked.

There was a sarcastic smile on Azhwarkkadian’s face.

Chapter 23 - Can a Dumb Woman Speak?

Aniruddha Brahmarayar was staring at Poonkuzhali for some time. Then he
summoned the maids who brought her. In a barely audible whisper he sought
some information from them. And when he got what he wanted he sent them
away.

He then turned towards Azhwarkkadian.

“Thirumalai, something has gone wrong. Terribly wrong!”

“I too think so, Master.”

“This woman is quite young. She’d be twenty at the most.”

“Not even twenty, Master.”

“The woman I was expecting should be forty.”

“More than that, Master.”

“Yes, yes. You have seen Mandhakini Devi in Lanka, right?”

“Yes, Master. I have. And I also tried to bring her here as per your orders. But I
could not.”

“This woman is not Mandhakini Devi.”

“No, Master. She is definitely not.”

“Then who is this woman? And how did she come here?”

“Why don’t we ask her, Master?”

“What’s the point in asking a dumb woman?”

“Gurudeva, is this lady really dumb.. .”

“I asked the maids. They say that she has not spoken anything ever since she
came here.”

“I have a doubt, Master. Whom did you send to bring this woman?”

“Oh My God! You mean to say that the idiot has messed up?”

“Which idiot, Master? I don’t think you would have sent an idiot for a critical
mission like this.”

“He appeared to be smart. When I went to Pazhaiyaarai a young man fought
with Vandhiya Thevan, the warrior from the Vana clan. Do you remember my
telling you about him?”

“Yes, Master. He is the son of the Chief Doctor of Pazhaiyaarai. His name is
Pinaakapaani.”

“The same fellow. After sending you and Vandhiya Thevan to meet Karikalan I
got this fellow released from the prison. I thought he’d be ideal for our
espionage work. I sent him to Kodikkarai. Looks like he has visited the place
earlier and knows about it.”

“You mean to say, Master that he brought this lady here?”

“I described the woman to be brought here. I gave him all her identifying marks.
He brought her to Thiruvaiyaaru and sent a message to me about the success of
the mission.”

“Master, I am dying to see the spy who succeeded in the mission in which I
failed. Where is he now? Why don’t we ask this girl herself?”

“Good idea. But he met with an accident last night.”

“Oh My God! What happened, Master?”

“He was walking behind the palanquin. I had ordered them to come into the Fort
only in the night. Accordingly they left Thiruvaiyaaru late in the evening and
reached the Fort in the early hours of night. I think you know about the sudden
storm last night.”

“Yes, Master. I too was worried about the storm. I was afraid. I took refuge in a
road-side Mandapam when the storm was in full fury.”

“When the palanquin was near the gates of the Fort a huge tree on the road-side
fell down. The palanquin had a narrow escape. The tree fell on those who came
behind the palanquin. The Doctor’s son was caught underneath the fallen tree.”

As the Chief Minister was talking they heard a high pitched female voice.

“Only the tree fell on that devil? And not the lightning? And the thunder? Very
sad. Very, very sad.”

There was so much fury in that voice. The two men turned around.

The Chief Minister looked at Poonkuzhali. He was surprised.

“Thirumalai, did this lady speak?”

“Yes, Master. I think so.”

“Surprise of surprises! How can a deaf girl hear, or a dumb woman speak?”

“Yes the deaf hearing and the dumb talking are matters of great surprise. But,
Master, you are an ardent devotee of that all-powerful God Vishnu. Anything can
happen if only you set your mind to it. Our Azhwar says in this context.. “

“Stop it, I say. Don’t drag the Azhwars into this. This is not due to the grace of
Lord Vishnu. Something has gone wrong. This girl has cheated us. Who is she?
What is her motive? Why did she act like a deaf and a dumb woman all along?”

“Why don’t we ask her Gurudeva?”

“Thirumalai, when I see the mischievous smile dancing on your face I strongly
suspect that you know everything. Ok, let me ask this woman. Hey girl, aren’t
you deaf? Do you hear me?”

“It would have been better if I had been deaf. But right now I am happy that I
can hear you. Didn’t I hear you say that the devil was caught under the falling
tree? My Lord, tell me, is that devil dead?” - Poonkuzhali talked with fervour.

“Aha, you can hear. And you can talk too. So you are not dumb after all.” The
Chief Minister pronounced with a flourish.

“This girl is not dumb. I am so very sure about it.” Azhwarkkadian too joined
the game.

“Aha, at last you have found out that I am not dumb. I have heard that the Chief
Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar is the most intelligent person in the Chozha
Kingdom. Looks like that’s true, My Lord.”

“Hey Girl, are you making fun of me? Beware! If you are not dumb why did you
act so since last night? Why didn’t you speak anything ever since you came here.
I want nothing but the truth. SPEAK!”

“My Lord, I had the ability to speak till I reached your Palace yesterday night.
People at my place used to call me a chatter-box. I never stop talking. But when
I saw your Palace and when I received the royal hospitality from the women of
your household I was stunned. Too stunned to speak, my Lord. Your women
spoke to me in the sign language. I thought all of them are dumb. I took pity on
them and spoke to them in sign language, my Lord. Only after I heard you now
did I remember that I too can speak.”

“I have no doubt that you are a loquacious lady. I am surprised how the Doctor’s
son was able to capture you. He might be a fool; but in a way he’s smart.”

“My Lord, that crook did not capture me. If only he had tried that he’d be the
honourable guest of the Lord of Death by this time.”

Poonkuzhali drew the knife from her waist and showed it to the Chief Minister.

“May you be blessed, Girl. But first keep the knife in its place. Why are you so
furious with him? After all he did not capture you.”

“No he did not. But his men tied me to my boat. They also tied my sister-in-law
to a tree. And to cap it all that devil of the Doctor’s son told me that he did not
have any hand in that.”

“To that extent at least, he’s smart. He followed my instructions to properly.”

“Oh My God, Honourable Chief Minister, my Lord, was it you who sent that
crook? Was it you who ordered that my aunt be caught and brought before you?”

“Your aunt? Is Mandhakini your aunt? Then tell me how are you related to
Thiagavidangar, the care-taker of the light house?”

“I am his darling daughter, my Lord.”

“I never knew that Thiagayavidangar has such a loquacious daughter.”

“Will you please do me a favour?”

“Sure, my child.”

“Don’t tell this to anybody.”

“But why, girl?”

“The whole country is praising you. They say that you know everything.
Nothing happens in this Kingdom without your knowledge. If you proclaim your
ignorance in a simple matter like this your reputation will go for a toss.”

“Hey girl, I don’t care about my reputation. Now please enlighten me on
something else too. You said that your aunt was captured by some men. Do you
know where they are? How did you get into the palanquin I sent for your aunt?
Where did you get in?”

“My Lord, first tell me why did you send your men to capture my aunt, a dumb,
harmless and an innocent woman.”

“I can’t reveal that to you, my dear daughter. That’s classified information.”

“My dear father, then I too can’t answer your question.”

“I know how to make you talk.”

“Your methods won’t work with me.”

“I can send you to the underground dungeons.”

“No prison can hold me.”

“No one who has gone to the underground dungeons has come back. It’s a point
of no return.”

“Wrong, again, my Lord. I know a person who came back from the underground
dungeons. Even yesterday I was travelling with Chendan Amudhan. I was
talking to him all the way.”

“Who is Chendan Amudhan?”

“He is the son of my other aunt. We two were travelling from Kodikkarai
together.”

“What for, my child?”

“To see the palaces, mansions and other high rise buildings of Thanjavur. I’ve
wanted to see them for quite some time. I also wanted to meet the Emperor. I
heard that the Emperor is sick. How is he doing now? Can I see him, my Lord?”

“There’s no improvement in his condition, my child. So, please forget meeting
him.”

“How can I, my Lord? I have to see him. I should tell him that women are not
safe in his great country, that they are forcibly kidnapped by people in power.”

“Hey girl, I don’t have the time to argue with you. My orders were not to capture
you. Tell me first how you got into the palanquin I sent for somebody else. Did
somebody force you into the palanquin?”

“No, my Lord. When I was near the Thanjavur Fort I saw a vacant palanquin. It
was raining outside. Just to escape from the rain I got into it.”

The Minister now spoke to his disciple.

“I now understand. They must have kept the palanquin down during heavy rain.
At that time this girl must have changed places with her aunt. The Doctor’s son
was under the tree and was unconscious. He could not have noticed the change
of occupants. Nor did the bearers see the women trading their places. This must
have happened near the Fort. Thirumalai, is my guess right?”

“Perfect, Master! I saw that happening with my own eyes.”

“WHAT? DID YOU SEE THAT? Then why didn’t you say that earlier? Tell me
what happened.”

“Yesterday night I was walking towards the Fort. It was raining heavily. Trees
were falling down. I decided to stay for a while in a road-side mandapam. Soon
after I went in, this girl and a young man came in. That man must be her cousin.
In the flash of lightning I saw the beads on his chest. I thought he must be a
strong Saivite. I wanted to talk about the greatness of Vaishnavism to him, more
to while away the time than anything else.

“Meanwhile some men brought a palanquin into the mandapam. I saw the Palm
Tree insignia on the screen of the palanquin. A lady got down from the
palanquin. These three people - I mean the lady, this girl and the young man were talking to each other in sign language in the cover of darkness. Then I saw
this girl getting into the palanquin. From the frequent flashes of lightning I could
find out that the person who got into the palanquin was different from the one
who got out. The bearers did not notice the change. When the rain stopped they
carried the palanquin away from the mandapam.”

“Aha! They have cheated me! But why did you keep quiet till now? What
happened to those two people?”

“They left the place a few minutes after the palanquin. I too left the place.”

“Thirumalai, why were you a silent spectator? Why didn’t you stop this girl’s
aunt? Are you a part of their conspiracy?”

“Oh My God! What words, my Master! I won’t even think of committing such a
cruel betrayal. First, I never knew that you were behind the abduction drama.
Because the palanquin belonged to the Pazhuvur Palace. So I thought that the
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was abducting that lady. Moreover how can I stop

Mandhakini Devi? One can even stop the storm; but not the Mute Queen,
Master. I have tried that in Lanka and have failed. Again, the lady knows me. If
she sees me she’d run away. Then nobody can get her.”

“Coming to think of it, I feel that the Doctor’s son was a lot smarter than you. He
has at least brought the lady up to here.”

“Master, your inference is not right in this matter. Mandhakini Devi would have
come on her own. And must have changed her mind at the last moment, when
she was near Thanjavur.”

“May be! She could not have gone far by now. It was raining almost for the
whole of last night. She should be somewhere near here. Thirumalai, we should
somehow get her here. Perhaps this girl may know where she is staying. Hey
girl, what’s your name?”

“Poonkuzhali, My Lord.”

“Aha, what a beautiful name! When it comes to giving names to his children
there is nobody who can beat Thyagavidangar. Poonkuzhali, you know where
your aunt will be now. If you do, please let me know. I promise you we won’t
harm her.”

Poonkuzhali thought for some time.

“My Lord, I know where she will be now. If you tell me why you sent your men

to capture her I will share her whereabouts with you.”

“Poonkuzhali, that’s a politically sensitive issue. It’s about a secret that concerns
the Palace. I can’t share that with you.”

“Then I can’t tell you where she is.”

“There’s no point in talking to this headstrong girl.”

“My Lord, if you accept my condition.. .. “

“Aha, see this girl is trying to impose a condition.. on me… Okay, tell me what’s
your condition? “

“If you promise me that you’ll make my aunt sit on the Chozha Throne and wear
the crown of the Chozha Empress I’ll bring her here.”

“Thirumalai, this girl has gone crazy.”

“Did you find that out only now, Master? Too late, Master. There is no need to
ask her. I know where her aunt will be now. Her cousin Chendan Amudhan lives
in a garden which is outside the gates of the Fort. He and his mother serve the
Thalikkulathar temple by offering flowers for God. The woman you are looking
for is at their place. If you send some men with me I’ll bring her here in no time,
Master.”

Poonkuzhali stared daggers at Azhwarkkadian.

“If you try to do that I’ll complain to the Emperor. I’ll see to it that your
atrocities are known to the whole town.”

“Thirumalai, we have to send her to the underground dungeons. There is no
other way.”

“If anybody comes near me I’ll kill him.”

Poonkuzhali took out the knife from her waist and held it in a threatening
fashion.

“Master, there is no need to send this girl to the dungeons. Instead we can send
her to Princess Kunthavai’s palace. I think Princess Kunthavai is here in this city
at this moment. She’d cure this crazy girl. Perhaps she might want to get a few
things done through this girl.”

“Why do you say that? How can this silly girl help Princess Kunthavai?”

“You don’t know, Master? The storm which we had here last night has wrought
havoc in the coastal area of Chozha Kingdom. Messengers have come to you
from all the four directions bearing the bad news.”

“Yes, yes. Thanks for reminding me. I need to see them now. I’ve lost precious
time talking to this silly girl. It could have been better if this girl had been born
dumb.”

“Then you can carry on with your misdeeds with nobody to question you, right?”
- Poonkuzhali spat fire.

“Master, Nagapattinam is in great danger. I hear that that the sea has come into
the town and the whole town is submerged.”

Both the Minister and Poonkuzhali were shocked by these words.

“It’s quite possible, Master, that the Princess Kunthavai herself may come here
to enquire about the calamity.”

As Azhwarkkadian was saying that they could hear people hailing somebody.

“Thirumalai, when did you get the Third Eye? When did you get the ability to
see the future? You are right. Looks like the Princess has arrived at my gates!”

The Chief Minister walked to the gates of his Palace.

Kunthavai and Vanathi entered his palace through the same gate.

When the Princess saw Poonkuzhali her face brightened. The look of concern
and grief vanished from her face. Her beautiful face now shone with a feeling of
surprise and happiness.

Chapter 24 - The Anxiety Of The Princess

The Minister welcomed Princess Kunthavai and Princess Vanathi and gave them
proper seats befitting their royal stature.

“Your Highness, if only you had sent word to me I’d have come to see you. May
I know the reason for this unexpected visit? Anything urgent, Devi? I hope the
Emperor is doing fine.”

“The Emperor’s health is as usual. But he is unduly worried. He is very much
disturbed by the storm and did not have a wink of sleep last night. He is anxious
about the safety and well-being of the people, especially the poor people living
in huts. He was talking about them all night. He almost ordered me to see you at
dawn and request you to immediately provide assistance on a war footing to
those who have been affected by the storm. I came here mainly to convey my
father’s message to you.”

“What can this humble servant do, Your Highness? You know that I am the
Chief Minister only in name. The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar, who is the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, is unfortunately not in the city at this moment. I am sure he
would have locked up the Royal Treasury and would have carried the keys with
him. Even his own brother, the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar cannot open the treasury
without the Senior’s consent. What help can I offer the poor and distressed,
Devi? Your Highness might have seen scores of people waiting outside the gates
of my palace. I am ashamed to see them, Devi. That’s why I am hesitant to even
move out of my room.”

“You need not worry on that count, Minister. I’ll give all my personal belongings

for the relief work. My mother too is ready to give her personal assets. And you
can take all the valuables in the Emperor’s Palace for the purpose. The Emperor
authorises you to do that. Please do something to provide at least some kind of a
temporary relief to those who are affected by the calamity.”

“Doing relief work with your personal assets will be like providing a single corn
to the hungry elephant. The storm has affected the whole of the kingdom. We are
yet to receive information about the extent of damage. And this man standing
here, my most ardent disciple, Azhwarkkadian, has brought terrible news. He
says that the sea has entered the cities and has drowned all the coastal towns
from Kodikkarai to Nagapattinam.”

The Minister did not fail to observe the waves of shock that passed through the
faces of the three women standing before him.

He now spoke in a soothing voice:

“But I don’t believe his words, Your Highness. What he says is a rumour. As it
usually happens, rumours travel faster than a cyclone. It is not possible to get
information from the coastal towns so soon. Even if soldiers travel on the fastest
horses the news won’t reach here before this afternoon. Meanwhile we can do
whatever is possible from our end.”

Princess Kunthavai struggled hard to calm herself.

“Minister Sir, I too heard the rumours about Nagapattinam. I have come to talk
about that as well. Didn’t we grant some endowments to the Choodamani
Monastery recently? And if the monastery is in danger, what will those poor

monks do?”

With these words she threw a pointed glance at Poonkuzhali.

“Minister Sir, how did this girl come here? Isn’t she the daughter of Kodikkarai
Thiagavidangar?”

“She is, Your Highness. But she is not soft-natured like her father. She has the
nasty habit of poking her nose in to matters totally unrelated to her, embarrassing
everyone around.”

Princess Kunthavai grew suspicious. Perhaps the Chief Minister had brought
Poonkuzhali only to spy on the whereabouts of Prince Arulmozhivarman. She
had grounds for her doubt. The Chief Minister was known for his smart tricks
and intelligent manoeuvres. She decided to take sides with Poonkuzhali.

“No, Minister Sir. I don’t agree with your assessment of her. Poonkuzhali is a
nice girl. Poonkuzhali, come here. Why is the Chief Minister angry with you?
Did you give him any trouble?”

Poonkuzhali came near Kunthavai.

“Devi, why don’t you ask the Chief Minister himself? Did I give trouble to him
or did he give trouble to me?”

“Ok, dear. You too appear to be angry. Come closer, my girl. Come, sit by my
side.”

Poonkuzhali obeyed.

“Minister Sir, why did you bring this girl here? Anything important?”

“Your Highness, I did not bring this girl here. I did not even know that such a
naughty girl lives in our kingdom. It’s all her making. She... came... ”

Poonkuzhali spat fire.

“Devi, why should the Honourable Minister be hesitant to reveal the truth? Ask
him to tell the whole story.”

The Minister spoke.

“She came on her own looking out for her aunt.”

“Who is her aunt? Oh, Chendan Amudhan’s mother? I think their house is
outside the Fort.”

“No, Your Highness. I am not referring to Amudhan’s mother. This girl has

another aunt who is also dumb and deaf. You might have heard of a crazy, dumb
woman wandering in the Lankan forests. I wanted to bring her here for an
important work. I tried my best to do that. I almost succeeded. But you know in
the last minute... this girl... “

Kunthavai’s excitement was beyond description.

“Oh My God! Is it true? Where is that lady? I want to see her right now!” The
Princess got up from her seat.

“Please forgive me, Your Highness. This girl spoilt everything at the last
minute.”

Kunthavai sat down disappointed. She then turned to Poonkuzhali.

“Is that true, Poonkuzhali? You’d never know what you have done.”

“Devi, please ask the Minister what kind of tactics he employed to bring my
aunt. Then you won’t blame me.”

The Chief Minister gave a brief account of the events.

Princess Kunthavai listened to him with rapt attention. Finally she declared

“Minister Sir, then she should be somewhere near the Fort. Why don’t you send
your men to look out for her?”

“Thank God there is no need to search for her. My disciple here says that she is
in Chendan Amudhan’s hut. And that my disciple saw her this morning.”

“Then what are waiting for, Minister Sir? Let other things wait. Let’s go. Let’s
bring her here. If you are busy, I’ll go myself. Vanathi, let’s go!”

Azhwarkkadian intervened.

“Let’s think before we act, Devi. If the lady sees strangers coming in a group she
might be frightened and she’ll run away. It is easy to capture the cyclone but not
that woman.”

The Minister endorsed his disciple’s views.

“What my disciple says is correct. Poonkuzhali’s aunt might run away if she sees
us as a group. Then all our efforts would go waste. What is your suggestion,
Thirumalai?”

“Ask this girl Poonkuzhali to bring her here. There are only two people in the
whole world whom the Mute Queen will listen to. One of them is this girl.”

“The other?” - Chief Minister was anxious to know.

Azhwarkkadian hesitated for a while.

“There’s a rumour that the other person is drowned in the sea.”

Kunthavai pretended not to have listened to Azhwarkkadian’s words. She
addressed Poonkuzhali.

“Dear Poonkuzhali, please bring your aunt here. I promise you that she won’t be
hurt. I need to see her on a very important work. Will you do it for me?”

“Yes, Your Highness! But the Chief Minister ought not to have employed such
cheap tactics to bring her here. If only I had known this earlier... “

“Yes, I do agree. When there is no transparency in our acts these lapses do occur.
I have learnt that myself in a hard way. I am sorry. Bring your aunt here quickly.
And you have one more work.” - Kunthavai’s words were soft and conciliatory.

The Chief Minister now addressed his favourite disciple.

“Thirumalai you go with this girl. If you experience any trouble in entering the
Fort you can come to my Palace through the secret way.”

Poonkuzhali and Azhwarkkadian took leave of everyone and went away.

Princess Kunthavai now spoke to the Chief Minister.

“Minister Sir, you have a lot of visitors. Tell them what needs to be told. Send
them away and come back. I want your advice on some crucial matters.”

“Give me a few minutes, Your Highness. I too need to talk to you.”

The Minister went away.

Vanathi opened her mouth for the first time.

“Akka, what is the other important work you have in mind for Poonkuzhali? Are
you planning to send her again to Nagapattinam?”

“Yes, Vanathi. But don’t let that trouble you. Nothing will happen to Ponniyin
Selvan.”

“Let me also go with her to Nagapattinam, Akka.”

“What will you do there, Vanathi? Then I need somebody else to guard you.”

“That boat-woman hates me, Akka.”

“How did you read her mind?”

“She never talked to me. Not even once.”

“You also did not talk to her. And she did not talk to you.”

“I was looking at her face every now and then. But she did not look at me at all.
Not even once! She seems angry with me. I don’t know why.”

“Yes, Vanathi. All the maidens in this country will be jealous of you. There is no
point in grieving over it.”

Chapter 25 - The Chief Minister’s Fault’

The Chief Minister disposed of the visitors at the gates of his palace quite fast
and almost ran back to the Princess.

“Devi, I have done whatever is possible under the circumstances. I have sent
men in all the directions to assess the damages caused by the storm. I have also
sent word to the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. I have requested him to open up the
Royal Treasury and leave it under our joint custody.”

“Minister Sir, I hear that there is an underground treasure house near the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s house. Is it true that it holds invaluable treasures? The Queen
Mother spoke to me about it.”

“The Queen Mother thinks that if that treasure is thrown open we can build a
thousand temples in the country. I am the Chief Minister; but I have not seen it.
Not even once, Devi. People who go there never come back alive.”

“Let it wait. Will those two bring the Mute Queen safely? I am worried that
having come thus far we might let her slip out of our hands.”

“Your Highness, what do you know about that good lady? And how? Why are
you so excited about her?”

“Minister Sir, the Emperor spoke about her a few days ago.”

“Oh My God! Did he tell you that she is alive?”

“No, he did not. He recounted what happened twenty five years ago. The
Emperor thinks that she is dead. That explains his troubled state of mind. He told
me that it was you who conveyed the death news to the Emperor. Didn’t you tell
my father that the lady jumped into the sea and killed herself? Then how did you
know that the lady is still alive?”

“I was about to ask the same question to you, Your Highness? How did you
know, Devi?”

“I have no qualms in sharing that with you, Minister Sir. The Warrior of the
Vaana Clan who had been to Lanka told me about her. And then my brother
Arulmozhi... “

Kunthavai realized her mistake and bit her lips.

“Your Highness, if you do not want to talk to me about Arulmozhivarman let it
be so. I will forget your mentioning his name in our conversation.”

“No, Minister Sir, I have decided to come clean on everything. That’s why I
came here. There is no point in hiding things. It gives rise to unnecessary
dangers and complications. I realized the truth of this statement last night. Please
listen, Sir. My brother did not drown in the sea. He was saved by the King of the
Sea, the Samudrarajan himself. He is now safe in the Choodamani Buddhist
Monastery at Nagapattinam. I had been to Nagappattinam only to see him. I

always had a doubt that you knew everything.”

“Your doubts are justified, Devi. But I never showed that I knew. I have a policy
not to interfere in any of your matters, Devi. I have spared nobody but you,
Devi. I have given orders to my men that they should never poke their noses in
whatever you do. I strongly believe that you’ll always be just and right.
Malaiyaman and I used to talk a lot about you. We used to say that had our
Princess Kunthavai been born a man she would have brought the whole world
under Chozha rule.”

“I confess that I too had a similar ambition. Though I was born a woman I
wanted to fulfill my ambition through my brothers. But now I have abandoned
my desires. I have come to the firm conclusion that women should never
interfere in the political affairs of a country. It was me who made my brother
stay in the Buddhist Monastery at Nagappattinam. See what has happened!”

“Nothing has happened, Devi. The King of the Sea was kind enough to rescue
the Prince when he was drowning in mid sea. Do you think he will hurt him
when he is on the shores, safe and secure?”

“Minister Sir, I want you to tell these words to my father. He is devastated.”

“Aha! Does the Emperor know that the Prince is in Choodamani Monastery?”

“I told him yesterday. I had to. There was no other go.”

“Oh My God! We could have delayed telling him for a few more days. I thought
your arrangement was brilliant. Devi, the entire country is fuming now. There
was an external storm last night. But an internal storm has been raging in the
minds of our people for quite some time. People are furious over
Madhuranthakan and the Pazhuvettaraiyar brothers. People have come to know
that it was the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar who sent ships to arrest the Prince. They
also believe that it was the Pazhuvettaraiyars who killed the Prince. If the people
know that the Prince is alive they will rise to action. There will be a mutiny. The
people would want the Prince to be crowned right now. They won’t stop till the
Prince is made the Emperor.

The Pazhuvettaraiyars are waiting for some lame excuses to start a war. The
Senior Velar of Kodumbalur is marching to the capital with a huge army. I am
afraid that there is going to be bloodshed in a hitherto unknown scale in our
Kingdom. I fear that this great Kingdom might be destroyed by sibling rivalry. I
have been praying to Lord Renganatha day and night to avert that calamity.”

“My prayers are also the same. I don’t want any of my brothers to ascend the
throne. I have killed that desire long back. I don’t have any objection to
Madhuranthakan being crowned as the King.”

“You may not object, Devi. But the people will. By God’s grace the Emperor
should live for many, many years. But if anything happens.... well... on that day
there will be a great mutiny… “

“Minister Sir, I am afraid that the terrible event might happen pretty early.
Yesterday the Emperor’s condition was quite serious. I was forced to tell him
that Ponniyin Selvan was safe and sound. But he did not believe my words. He
thought I was just giving him empty words of consolation. He is still under the
hallucination that the ghost of that ‘evil woman’ is taking revenge on his sons.”

“Oh My God! Devi, can you please tell me what happened last night?”

“I came here only for that, Minister Sir. I also want to seek your advice on some
issues. Do you remember that once I came here to establish Sundara Chozha
Hospital here in the capital? At that time the Emperor told me his life story.
When he accidentally took refuge in an island near Lanka, a fisherwoman saved
him from a charging bear. And then he lived a dream-life with that girl in that
heavenly island. After some time he was taken to Thanjavur. He also remembers
seeing her in the crowd at the time of his coronation. And then he sent his best
friend, that is you, Minister Sir, to bring her. You went in search of her and then
came back to report that she fell into the sea and died. From then on he has been
telling that her ghost visits him often to torment him. And of late the ghost is
coming often. That’s what he told me last night.”

“But Devi, do you believe him?”

“The story was quite unusual. Yes, I was confused. I first thought that the
Emperor had lost his mind. Otherwise he would not complain about the ghost of
the dead woman visiting him often. But as I started to think of those events I had
other doubts. One day my friend Vanathi heard the Emperor screaming. She ran
to his room. She saw a figure closely resembling the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur
standing before the Emperor. The shock was too much for her. She fainted. From
then on I started having doubts about the relationship between the Mute Queen
and the Pazhuvur Queen. My doubts were confirmed by what Vandhiya Thevan
and Arulmozhivarman said. Is Nandini Devi the mute woman’s daughter?”

“I too had those doubts, Devi. If we just consider the similarity in appearance
that inference is inevitable. But can we decide solely on that? Nandini Devi
could even be the mute woman’s youngest sister. There are only three people in
the world who know about the relationship.”

“Who are they?”

“The first is the Queen Mother, Sembian Madevi. She is guarding a secret in her
heart which is eating her insides. But we can’t know what it is unless the Queen
Mother herself chooses to share it with us. She revealed it to Emperor
Kandaraathithar at the time of his death. Kandaraathithar started telling that
secret to me. But before he could hardly speak two words he gasped for breath
and died.”

“Who are the other two, Minister Sir?”

“The other two can’t speak. One is Chendan Amudhan’s mother. And the other is
her elder sister, the Mute Queen. We can’t get anything from Amudhan’s mother.
She is fiercely loyal to Sembian Madevi. So long as the Queen Mother is alive
she won’t reveal the secret. That was the reason I took great efforts to bring
Mandhakini from Lanka.”

“Oh, her name is Mandhakini? How did you know that she was alive?”

“Devi, I knew that twenty five years ago.”

“WHAT? YOU KNEW THAT TWENTY FIVE YEARS AGO? Then why didn’t
you tell my father? Because my father believes that she is dead he has been
suffering. And you know that very well, Minister Sir?”

“I know, Devi. I know.”

“Even after knowing that why did you hide the truth from him?”

Aniruddhar let out a long sigh. From his facial expression Kunthavai could
gather that his mind was in a state of turbulence. The Chief Minister started a
long narration:

“Devi, I committed an offence twenty five years ago. I am confessing it to you
for the first time. Nobody else in this world knows this. Yes, your father sent me
to look out for that fisherman’s daughter. I went with some horsemen. We
reached Kodikkarai. We learnt that she jumped into the turbulent sea from the
light house. There were eye-witnesses to that ghastly act. Thiagavidangar, the
caretaker of the light house, recounted the event in a trembling voice. I came
back to Thanjavur and conveyed the news to my dear friend.”

“I don’t see your fault in any of these, Minister Sir.”

“Well, this is my offence. The fisherman’s daughter fell into the sea. But she did
not die. A fisherman rescued her. He took her in his boat. And he reached the
shore several miles away from Kodikkarai. As we were coming back from
Kodikkarai I saw the boat coming in. I saw the woman in the boat. I knew who
she was. I gave loads of money to the boatman and requested him to take her
safely to Lanka and keep her there. I came back to Thanjavur and told the
Emperor that the fisherman’s daughter was dead. I thought I was helping your
father. I never thought that my lie would lead to such disaster.”

The Princess intervened.

“Minister Sir, in a way that looks like your fault. But you did it with all good
intentions. But tell me this; did you get any news about her?”

“Yes, I’ve been hearing about her. As soon as Sundara Chozhan was made a
Crown Prince he went to the battlefront at Madurai. I went to Varanasi. I stayed
there for a few years to learn our scriptures. I returned to Pazhaiyaarai after some
time. One day I saw the father of Eesana Bhattar chatting with the fisherwoman.
He revealed another secret to me. He told me that the fisherwoman stayed in the
garden attached to the Queen Mother’s palace for some time. And that she gave
birth to twins and then ran away from the place. He also told me that she used to
come once in a way to see her children. I asked him about the children. He
refused to say anything about them. He told me that it was a secret known only
to the Queen Mother. I did not want to press him further.

Devi, when Arulmozhi was a child he fell into the Cauvery River. People used to
say he was saved by Mother Cauvery. But in reality he was saved only by the
fisherwoman. I knew this even at that time.”

“What you say is true, Minister Sir. Arulmozhi saw the kind lady in Lanka and
told me the same thing. But listen to this! Do you know what my father thinks?
He thinks that the ghost of the fisherwoman comes often to wreak vengeance on
his children. Last night when the great storm was raging outside, the storm
inside my father’s mind was no less. He did not sleep even for a second. He did
not let me sleep as well. He told me the old story once again.

‘That devil is seeking revenge. It was that devil who killed my Arulmozhi by
drowning him in a storm. And she won’t rest till she kills Karikalan.’ He kept
saying this again and again.

He then passionately pleaded with the Lord of Death - “Please take me from this

world when at least one of my sons is alive.”

I consoled him. He did not listen. Finally I had no option but to tell him that
Arulmozhivarman is safe in the Buddhist Monastery at Nagappattinam.”

“Was the emperor peaceful after that?”

“No, Minister Sir. He became even more agitated. First he did not believe the
news. But then I told him that I saw the Prince in person. He asked me why I
have not brought him here. I told him that he was not well and was not fit
enough for the long journey. And that I’ll make arrangements for his journey as
soon as he recovers from the illness. I also hinted about the complications that
would follow if Arulmozhi appears on the scene now. As soon as he heard this
his mind went in a different direction.

‘It’s this Kingdom that has become a problem to my children. If it is made clear
that the throne is not for my children then they will live happily for a long time.
That’s why I am anxious to bring them here and tell them that the throne is not
for any of them.’

Suddenly he had another fear. The hurricane was so unusually strong that even
the Palace was a little shaken. Once after a huge thunder blast my father became
very emotional.

’My dear daughter I may not see Arulmozhi again. I know about the storms and
whirlwinds of the Eastern seas. Today’s storm will make the waves near the
shore rise up to the height of a coconut tree. The sea will enter into the land and
large areas will be submerged under water. You know one day, long ago one of

our towns Kaveripattinam went under the sea. Similarly the sea may enter
Nagappattinam and gobble up the city. The Buddhist Monastery which is
between the sea and the canal can never escape the storm. That devil of a lady
could not drown him in the sea. Instead she is bringing sea into the land to claim
his life. I am going now to foil her attempts.’

“My father was crying like a child, Minister Sir. He tried to get up from his bed.
And then became weak again and lied down. Minister Sir, if you happen to hear
the lamentations of my father. . . Well. .. Well… even the stone and the
mountains will melt.”

There was an unending stream of tears from her eyes.

Chapter 26 - The Commotion In The Streets

Vanathi could not bear to see Princess Kunthavai crying. She too started to cry.
Aniruddha Brahmarayar had an iron heart. He had seen many a summer and had
been seasoned by the woes and worries of lives in high places. Even then his
heart melted on seeing the tears in the eyes of the Princesses.

“Your Highness, I am the one who is responsible for all the sufferings of your
father. I don’t know what atonement I have to do to wash away the sin.”

“Minister Sir, you know everything. And yet I venture to tell you what little I
know. If only you can tell my father that the fisherwoman is not dead, he will
find peace. His heartaches will vanish. I came here only to make that request to
you. I also came to request you to somehow bring my stepmother. But now I see
that you are already on the job.”

“I too had come to that conclusion, Devi. I had decided to tell the Emperor that
Mandhakini Devi is alive. But he won’t believe my words. How can I make him
believe that whatever I told him earlier was a lie and that what I am going to tell
him now is the truth? That was the reason I delayed telling your father till I
brought the lady here. And if the Emperor sees her in person he will have no
choice but to believe, right? I went to the Lankan Island precisely for that reason.
But the Pazhuvettaraiyars twisted the story. They told the Emperor that I was
conspiring with your brother, Prince Arulmozhivarman and the Senior Velar of
Kodumbalur to dethrone the Emperor. At least to prove my innocence I have to
take Mandhakini Devi to your father, Devi.”

“But if my father sees her all of a sudden, will he be able to withstand the shock?

I think we need to first prepare him for the meeting.”

“Yes, Devi, I had planned that too. I had planned to talk to the Emperor as soon
as Mandhakini Devi is brought to this place. I had even planned to come to the
Palace to meet the Emperor this morning. But Thiagavidangar’s daughter
intervened and spoilt everything. I will see to it that the naughty girl is punished
someday.”

“Please, Minister Sir, please spare her. I don’t know whether she is good or bad.
But she is the one who saved Arulmozhivarman from drowning.”

“God saved him, Devi. The one who is forever sleeping in the Ocean of Milk,
the Great Vishnu saved the Prince. This little girl could not have done anything
without God’s help. If astrology is true, if stars and planets tell us about the
future then even the fire and the floods, the storm and the earthquake cannot
harm the Prince.”

“Nothing can happen without God’s grace. But even His grace has to come only
through human beings. I had planned to send Poonkuzhali to Nagapattinam. But
if you think otherwise... if you think that bringing the Prince here will be a better
option... well... “

“No, Devi. Till the issue of succession is fully resolved let not the country know
about the Prince. I am planning to discuss the issue with the Emperor. If he
wants Madhuranthakan to be crowned as the King then it is better to send away
Arulmozhi to Lanka again. People will never accept Madhuranthakan as the
King so long as Prince Arulmozhivarman is here. There will be a civil war.
Blood will be flowing in the rivers of Chozha Kingdom.”

“Oh My God! Then do you think it will be a good idea to send Chendan
Amudhan and Poonkuzhali to Nagapattinam?”

“I do, Your Highness. And if need be we can make Prince Arulmozhivarman to
visit the capital city in cognito.”

“You are right, Minister Sir. If my father sees Mandhakini Devi and Arulmozhi,
and is convinced that both of them are alive, he will be peaceful.”

“Does your father worry about the Crown Prince, Devi?”

“No, not at all. The Emperor is convinced that nobody in the world can harm
Karikalan. What is your take on this, Minister Sir?”

“Honestly, Devi, I don’t believe that. I agree that the Crown Prince is invincible
in the battle field. But it is not difficult to deceive him elsewhere. The
Pazhuvettaraiyars are against him. The Junior Queen of Pazhuvur is engaged in a
conspiracy against the Crown Prince. I managed to communicate the news to the
Crown Prince through my disciple Azhwarkkadian. But my mission is a failure,
Devi. The Crown Prince refused to visit the capital city in spite of repeated
invitations from the Emperor; but he has now gone to Kadambur
Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace.”

“Minister Sir, I have sent news to my brother Karikalan that the Junior Queen of
Pazhuvur might probably be our sister. I have also requested the warrior from
Vaana clan to guard the Crown Prince and never leave his side. If only Vandhiya
Thevan were here.... we could have sent him to Nagapattinam.”

“Then I would have sent my disciple to make sure that the young man is not
caught in trouble. Even now if you decide to send Poonkuzhali I’d like to send
my disciple Thirumalai.”

“But they have gone to fetch Mandhakini Devi. They haven’t come yet. If my
step mother comes here, most of my problems will go away. And when the lady
comes you’ll immediately bring her to my father, right? I need to tell my mother
the whole story. I need some time to prepare her for the most emotional meeting
of her life.”

“Aha! My heart goes for your mother, the daughter of Malaiyaman. What an
agony for her! When your mother’s father the old man of Thirukkovilur knows
about this... Oh My God! I can’t even guess how he will react. And if he knows
that his grand children are not going to be Kings he might even be prepared to
destroy the whole Kingdom.”

“Leave the job of pacifying my grandfather to me, Minister Sir. I am worried
about the Senior Velar of Kodumbalur, who happens to be this girl Vanathi’s
uncle. He is waiting for the day the Kodumbalur girl is going to adorn the
Chozha Throne. I am sure even this girl wants the position.”

Vanathi shouted in fury “AKKA... “

Before Vanathi could talk any further, Poonkuzhali walked in. All of them were
shocked to see her coming alone.

“Hey girl! Where is your aunt? And where is Thirumalai?” - The Chief Minister
was tense.

“Sorry, Minister Sir, my pride has taken a severe blow. I could not bring her here
as promised.”

“What happened? Did she vanish before you went there? Or did she refuse to
come? Then. .. “

“No, Sir. We brought her into the Fort. Then she was caught in the crowd of
people and disappeared.”

Poonkuzhali gave the full details:

Fortunately for them Mandhakini Devi was in Chendan Amudhan’s house. And
she had reason to do so. Amudhan’s hut had been shattered in the storm. A tree
had fallen on the hut. Chendhan Amudhan who was completely drenched in the
rain was down with high fever. He was in a state of delirium. The two sisters Amudhan’s mother and his aunt - were busy removing the tree and cleaning up
the house. Mandhakini was pleased to see Poonkuzhali again. But she was a tad
hesitant to meet Thirumalai. Poonkuzhali explained to her that Thirumalai was
on their side. Mandhakini was pacified.

Poonkuzhali and Thirumalai had discussed how to present the case to
Mandhakini even while walking to Amudhan’s house. Poonkuzhali faithfully
carried out the plan. Accordingly she told the Mute Queen that the Emperor was
in his death bed and that his end might come any time. And that he wanted to see
Mandhakini before he breathed his last. She also told her that the Emperor still

remembered her and that there was a half chance that the Emperor might live for
some more time if only he could see her once. It was only for that reason that the
Chief Minister sent his men to capture her and bring her to the Emperor’s
presence.

Poonkuzhali also told her in sign language that she stayed in the Chief Minister’s
Palace for the night. She further told her that Princess Kunthavai was waiting for
the Mute Queen at the Chief Minister’s palace and that she would personally
take her to the Emperor.

Mandhakini consented to go with them to the Palace. When they reached the
gates of the Fort the personal guards of the Emperor, the Velakkara Army, were
entering the Fort. Mandhakini and her escorts stepped aside to let the army pass.

Mandhakini was looking at the King’s Bodyguards with great curiosity. A big
crowd barged into the Fort along with the army of body guards. The soldiers
guarding the gates did their best to prevent the entry of those people; but failed.
The soldiers even tried to close the gates of the Fort. But they could not do it.
They could not do anything.

Azhwarkkadian told them - “Let us not go with this crowd. There is a secret
underground passage that’ll take us to the Chief Minister’s Palace. Let’s use it.”
Poonkuzhali was trying her best to pass on this information to Mandhakini
through sign language.

But the Mute Queen did not pay heed. She tried to go in along with the crowd.
Azhwarkkadian and Poonkuzhali had no option other than to follow her. After
entering the Fort, Thirumalai told about the secret passage once again and
suggested that they could use that to avoid the unruly crowd. Poonkuzhali tried
to communicate to Mandhakini; but she did not listen. She blended with the

crowd. The other two were surprised. The Mute Queen was generally allergic to
crowd. What made her to freely mix with the crowd, they wondered.

After sometime some people in the crowd started noticing Mandhakini.

“Hey, look at this lady! Doesn’t she look like the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur?”

People started to talk among themselves. Poonkuzhali and Azhwarkkadian were
concerned. They tried to stop her. Some men noticed Azhwarkkadian and started
asking - “Who’s this Vaishnavite? Why is he bothering this lady?”

Some of the King’s bodyguards heard these words. They came back and
surrounded the Mute Queen. They pushed other people around her. In the melee
Poonkuzhali and Azhwarkkadian were pushed away from Mandhakini.

One of the King’s bodyguards spoke to Mandhakini Devi - “Who are you, Devi?
Is anyone trying to hurt you? Let us know. We’ll catch culprit and hang him
here.”

Mandhakini remained silent.

One man saw her and remarked, “Doesn’t she look like the Pazhuvur Queen?”

“Yes, she does. Perhaps she is very proud because of that.”

“The entire Pazhuvur crowd is like this woman. An arrogant lot!”

All these things happened near the palace of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. A few
Pazhuvur soldiers had come there.

They heard the derogatory remark about the Pazhuvur crowd.

“Who insulted the Pazhuvur people? Let him dare to come to my presence.”

One of the bodyguards went up to him.

“Yes. I am the one. What are you going to do?”

“You are arrogant. Your crowd is arrogant. Your pride will be destroyed very
soon. Beware!”

“Oh, you are talking like this because you have killed our Prince, right? It’s
because of such evil elements like you that we are facing devastating storms.
Like the one we had yesterday.” - A man in the crowd burst out.

The Pazhuvur soldier sprang on that man. The King’s bodyguard stopped him.
Pandemonium prevailed for a while.

“Hail the Great Men of Pazhuvur” one group shouted.

“Hail Sundara Chozhan, the Emperor of The Three Worlds “another group
shouted.

“Hail Kodumbalur Velar.”

“Hail Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman.”

Just then the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar arrived on a horse. The clashes stopped.
People scattered in all the directions. The body guards went to the front. The
soldiers of Pazhuvur surrounded the Junior and told him what happened.
Poonkuzhali and Azhwarkkadian were on one side of the street. They were
looking for Mandhakini Devi. She was not to be found.

“Aiyoo! What is this? Oh My God! How did this happen? What a wonderful
Government we have! Tell me how are we going to find my aunt? Will she be
hurt? Has she been kidnapped by somebody?” - Poonkuzhali was concerned.

As soon as the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and his soldiers went away they searched
for the mute queen. She was not to be found.

Azhwarkkadian suggested - “Let me be here for a while. You run to the Chief
Minister’s Palace and tell the Minister and the Princess about the developments.
We two are not enough to search your aunt. The Minister and the Princess will

make some arrangements.”

Poonkuzhali hesitated. Azhwarkkadian spoke again.

“Please listen to me. Your aunt is safe. Nothing would have happened to her. I
suspect that she might have seen a known face in the crowd. She was focussing
her eyes in one direction. My guess is that she saw somebody known to her.
That’s why she came in along with the crowd. I am sure that she is following
him. We can definitely find her. But first pass on the news to the Chief Minister.”

Poonkuzhali came running to the Chief Minister’s Palace.

Kunthavai was concerned; but the Chief Minister was not.

“See, Your Highness. The ghost of mutiny is waiting for a chance to pounce
upon us. If only the people knew that Arulmozhivarman is alive, the whole
country will be on fire.”

“So long as you are the Chief Minister, that won’t happen! Now let’s talk about
my step mother, Minister Sir. It looks like what I feared might happen. Tell me
how to find her.”

“Don’t worry about her, Devi. She has come into the Fort. She can’t go out
without my knowledge. I’ll make arrangements for that. I’ll also send a search
party to look for her. I am sure Mandhakini Devi will not leave our Fort without
seeing the Emperor.”

Chapter 27 - In the Subterranean Treasury

In a way Azhwarkkadian’s guess on the reason for the Mute Queen getting away
from them was right.

A huge crowd barged into the Fort soon after the Emperor’s bodyguards entered.
Mandhakini saw the conspirator, Ravidasan, entering the Fort along with the
crowd. As a general rule people who are deprived of the use of one sense organ
would have extraordinary sharpness in the other sense organs. Mandhakini could
not talk. Nor could she hear. As if to compensate these losses her eye-sight was
unusually sharp. Azhwarkkadian and Poonkuzhali focused their attention only
on Mandhakini Devi and did not see anybody else. That was the reason
Mandhakini could see Ravidasan while the other two did not see him.

Mandhakini Devi had a gift of a strong sense of foreboding. She strongly felt in
her nerves that Ravidasan had come into the Fort for an evil mission. She
remembered Ravidasan’s attempts to kill Prince Arulmozhivarman in Srilanka.
When she saw Ravidasan in the streets of Thanjavur her eyes never left him,
even for a second.

When the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar rode into the crowd, in a confused state the
crowd dispersed giving way for him. Precisely at that time Mandhakini saw
Ravidasan and another person hurrying into one of the alleys inside the Fort. She
ran behind the two men and soon she was in the same alley with them.

A minute after this happened, Azhwarkkadian and Poonkuzhali were pushed
away by the crowd and for a few seconds they could not keep track of
Mandhakini Devi. Later when they looked for her she was not to be found.

As soon as Mandhakini entered the alley she turned back a couple of times to
check whether Poonkuzhali and Azhwarkkadian were following her. She did not
see them. She was clear that her priority now was to follow Ravidasan.

Long back when Vandhiya Thevan fled from Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men he
took exactly the same route now taken by Ravidasan and his accomplice, Soman
Sambavan, the one who was part of the conspirators’ assembly at the war
memorial at Thiruppurambayam.

The two men ran through the alleys. They did not mind the trees lying on the
way. They just jumped over those fallen trees and the small cesspools of stagnant
water. There was a mild breeze which caused the leaves to flutter and the
branches to sway gently. They never suspected that somebody could follow
them. They never looked back. And even if they did, they would not have
noticed Mandhakini Devi who was quite adept in hiding herself from their eyes.

Their fast walk ended near the outer wall of the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s
palace. An uprooted tree had fallen over the wall. Ravidasan and Soman
Sambavan used the tree as a ladder to scale the wall and jump into the palace
garden. Mandhakini Devi was keenly observing their actions. She also took the
same route.

Ravidasan made Soman Sambavan wait in the garden. He then approached the
palace of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Both the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and his
queen, Nandini, were not in the palace at that time. The place looked deserted.
Ravidasan could however hear the voices of the maids. Two of the maids came
to the back yard. They found that many trees in the garden had fallen down.

“Our garden now looks like the Asokavan of Ramayana, after it was destroyed
by Hanuman.” A maid commented.

“You are right. If only our Sita Devi were here now she would have been terribly
upset.”

They were chatting for some time and then turned back to go into the Palace.
Ravidasan, who was well hidden in the bushes, mimicked the hooting sound of
an owl. The maids looked in the direction of the sound.

One of the maids said - “Did you hear that? An owl is hooting in the afternoon. I
think even the owls have gone crazy after yesterday’s storm.” The other maid
remained silent. The two women then went into the palace.

After sometime the silent one came back. She reached the gazebo that was
sandwiched between the Palace and the underground treasury. It was in this
gazebo that Vandhiya Thevan met the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur long back.

The maid looked at the garden with a pointed glance. The owl’s hooting was
heard again. The maid walked towards the source of the sound. Ravidasan who
had been hiding behind a large tree came out to meet her. He stared at the maid
with his magnetic eyes.

“Oh, Sorcerer, was that you? The Queen is not here. Why did you come now?”

“The Queen sent me here.”

“Oh My God! You didn’t leave the Queen in peace even while she was
travelling. Why did you come? If only somebody knows.... “

“So what...”

“Don’t be so flippant. The Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar is suspicious of the maids
here in this palace. He has warned me. He has issued strict orders - should you
ever come here I should report to him immediately.”

“Let him go to hell. Their period is over. Don’t worry. I want the keys of the
underground treasury. Please bring them fast.”

“No. I won’t give them to you.”

“See, this is your Queen’s signet ring. I have the required authority.”

“You might have stolen it from her, who knows?”

“How dare you call me a thief? And you do that even after seeing your Queen
trembling in fear in my presence. I am going to curse you now. Tonight nine
ghosts will come to your bed and carry you to the burial ground and then..... “

“NO! NO! NO! DON’T DO THAT! Let your ghosts be with you. Why should I

bother about anything? You showed me the Queen’s signet ring and I am
fetching you whatever you need. But don’t be in a hurry. See the garden is in
ruins. And the maids of the palace are coming here often to have a look. I’ll
bring the keys to you when the girls are eating their dinner. And be patient till
then.”

“Agreed. Please bring some food for me as well. It has been two days since I ate.
So bring me plenty of food.”

The maid left the place.

Ravidasan and Soman Sambavan sat on a fallen tree and were chatting for a long
time. Mandhakini Devi was keenly observing their actions. She hid herself from
their view and sat a little away from them. She could not understand the
conversation between Ravidasan and the maid. But her intuition warned her that
something bad was going to happen quite soon.

The maid returned after a long time. Ravidasan went to her. He got the keybunch and the food parcel from her.

Ravidasan and the girl went to the gazebo and from there they started walking
towards the subterranean treasury. The treasury-lock had to be opened with three
different keys. The place was absolutely dark.

Ravidasan turned to the maid.

“Oh My God! I forgot! How can I go in this darkness? Can you bring a light or
at least a torch?”

“How can I bring the light or torch at noon? If somebody sees me and suspects
my intentions… “

“I don’t know. But do you want me to believe that you are not smart enough to
smuggle a light here? If you don’t I’ll send fire-mouthed ghosts to devour you...
“

“Will you please shut up? You want a light? I’ll bring it.”

“And before you do that I’ll have my food. I am famished.”

As soon as the maid left for the palace Ravidasan went into the garden along
with the food parcel. He gave it to his accomplice Soman Sambavan.

“You might have to stay in the Treasury for two or three days. You may have to
wait for the right opportunity. Have this food parcel with you. The girl has gone
to fetch a light. You need to go into the treasury before she comes back.”

The two men walked towards the treasury. Mandhakini Devi was in hot pursuit.

Chapter 28 - The Subterranean Chamber

Ravidasan carefully looked in all the directions. He then pointed out the open
door that led to the subterranean chamber to Soman Sambavan. He asked him to
go in.

“At first you won’t be able to see. It’ll be so dark down there. But don’t stand
near the door. Go a little further and stand there till you get used to that
darkness.”

No sooner than Soman Sambavan entered the underground passage he was
swallowed by the darkness. Ravidasan then walked through the garden path to
reach Nandini Devi’s gazebo. He was viewing the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace
from there. There was a reason. If somebody other than the maid came out he
would have to run back to the underground chamber and close the door.

While Ravidasan was in the gazebo Mandhakini walked towards the
underground chamber without making any noise. The door was still open. She
got in.

Mandhakini was used to staying in dense forests during night time. The
subterranean darkness did not deter her. She was able to regain her vision in a
few seconds. She saw Ravidasan’s companion hitting a pillar in the passage. She
walked in the opposite direction. She found a flight of steps leading further
down. She walked down the steps and stood there.

Soman Sambavan must have heard some ruffling noise.

“Who is that? Who is that? - He shouted.

His voice went through the open door and reached the ears of Ravidasan. At the
same time Ravidasan saw the maid walking to him with a burning torch in hand.
He ran ahead and cautioned his accomplice. As soon as he entered the passage
he spoke out aloud “Sambava, where are you? Did you call me?”

“Yes, I did.”

“Why are you in a hurry? If only somebody outside heard you we’d be finished.
Did you think that I’d leave you alone here and go away?”

“No, not at all. I wanted to ask you something.”

Soman Sambavan approached Ravidasan.

At this time there was a bright light near the door.

“Oh, the maid has come back with a torch. She should not see you at any cost.
Go! Go deep inside and hide yourself behind one of the pillars. Quick!”

Soman Sambavan retreated in a hurry.

The next second the maid was there at the door along with the burning torch.

“Sorcerer, Sorcerer, where are you?”

“Right here.”

Ravidasan approached her and got the torch from her.

“Hi girl, lock the door from outside and take back the keys. Come back with the
keys after thirty minutes. Knock the door gently. If I respond to your knocking
then and only then open the door. Make sure nobody is around when you open
the door.”

“Done, Sorcerer. But it is my duty to warn you. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar has
already smelt something fishy. If you are caught by any chance, promise me that
you won’t spill my name.”

“Don’t worry, girl. Didn’t I tell you that the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s time is up?
He is in his last days.”

“Why do you want me to come again to open the door? Don’t you know about
the other exit?”

“Yes, I do. But that exit will be useless today. Vettaru River is in floods. Ok, you
may go now. And come back exactly after 24 minutes.”

The maid went out.

The moment she locked the door from outside Ravidasan locked the door from
inside. He then held the torch aloft and went to Soman Sambavan.

“Sambava, you wanted to ask me something?”

“Did you come here earlier?”

“I have come here so many times. Whatever gold and treasures we have now
came only from here.”

“I didn’t ask that. You left me here and went out. Did you come in again?”

“No. I came just now.”

“Only now? You didn’t come earlier?”

“No, I didn’t. Why do you ask?”

“After you went out something blocked the light at the door. I hit a pillar.”

“Perhaps the door might have closed and opened again.”

“It seemed as though a figure walked in. I remember hearing the footsteps.”

“You are hallucinating, Sambava. This underground chamber is like that. At
times there will be shadows in darkness. There will be a sudden flash of light
which will vanish the very next second. You’ll hear weird sounds. Many people
who have come here have died of fear. Their skeletons are scattered around here.
Pazhuvettaraiyar has deliberately left the bones here so that anybody who enters
the underground treasury by stealth will be scared to death.”

“But is it at all possible to come here by stealth?”

“Normally, no. I don’t think anybody but me has come here in that way. Even I
have come here thanks to the Junior Queen and her maid.”

“But then you were talking about the bones and skeletons?”

“If Pazhuvettaraiyar wants to punish anyone he would keep the doors to the
treasury slightly open and let the person hover around the area. If the person is
tempted by his greed to come in, well, that’s his end. He’d never go back alive.
Even his bones will not go out of this place.”

“Are you suggesting that but for you no one else who has entered this place by
stealth has gone out alive?”

“Earlier I was quite sure of that. But now I have my doubts. Especially about
two persons.”

“I know who you are referring to. Vandhiya Thevan and Kandhanmaran. Right?”

“Yes.”

“We should have killed these people. Why are we still letting them live?”

“How many times should I have to tell you? The Junior Queen has spared
Vandhiya Thevan for a very important task. When Sundara Chozhan’s clan is
destroyed completely Vandhiya Thevan will also die. The time has come. “

““

“Come; let me show you the secret passages around here. You will have to be
careful about one thing. There is a Mandapam here which contains all the
precious stones and gems. These were collected by the Chozha Kings over
hundreds of years and are now lying in heaps. They are priceless. If you are
tempted by them you’ll forget your mission.”

“Ravidasa, do you know who are you talking to? I have also sworn on the
headless body of our King Veerapandiyan as you did.”

“Who denied that? When I saw those heaps of priceless gems and pearls, I too
was a little distracted. That’s why I am warning you. Come let’s go. First I’ll
show you the way to the King’s Palace from here. You go around the place and
familiarize yourself with the surroundings after I leave. It might come handy
some day.”

Ravidasan held the torch aloft and walked ahead. Soman Sambavan walked
along.

They went on the same way which the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and Nandini had
used some time ago. In the smoky illumination provided by the burning torch the
pillars and their shadows appeared like large black ghosts. The bats that lived in
that darkness seemed like little spirits let loose. There were huge spider-webs in
many places occupied by giant spiders. On the ground there were many strange
creatures that crawled - some fast and some pretty slow. As Ravidasan had
predicted they could hear many weird sounds. The storm raging outside echoed
inside the subterranean chambers.

Soman Sambavan froze.

“Ravidasa, do you hear the sound of footsteps?”

“Why not? I do hear the sound of our footsteps. Now is the time to be fearless.
Don’t get scared by the sounds and sights. You are shivering in fear even while I
am here with you. How are you going to be here all alone for two, three days?”

“No, I am not afraid. Instead of indulging in pointless hallucination after you
have gone, I want to clarify certain things with you. Didn’t you say that those
who entered this chamber died here?”

“Yes, I did. And their ghosts would be hovering around here. So what? The
ghosts will be scared of us. That little boy, Vandhiya Thevan, had been here and
he escaped from this place unhurt. You and I have seen a million ghosts. Why
should we be afraid?”

“I am not worried about the spirits and ghosts. I am worried about the other
creatures... the venomous ones... snakes... scorpions... and others... “

“Are you saying that you are afraid of snakes and scorpions? The moment they
see us they’ll run to their holes.”

“Even then to stay here for two, three days... I am a little worried, Ravidasa. If I
get an opportunity a little earlier... “

“No, No. Don’t do that. Never ever commit that blunder. Today is Tuesday.
You’ll have to wait for Wednesday and Thursday. And during these two days
find out the time when Sundara Chozhan is alone. His Queen will always be by
his side. She will go to Durga Parameswari Temple on Friday. You’ll have to
finish your work on Friday night. Sundara Chozhan’s clan will be destroyed
without a trace on Friday. Any change in the plan might spoil our mission and
endanger our lives too.”

The men continued to walk fast. Soman Sambavan was a bit restless. He was
looking around as he walked. But the two men could not see Mandhakini who
was following them closely, hiding behind the pillars at times and silently
leaping forward at times to ensure that they were in her sight.

They reached the other side of the subterranean chamber. There was a high wall
before them. There were no windows, doors or other entrances through the wall.
But at the top of the wall there was a small latticed window through which some
light entered the chamber.

Ravidasan gave the torch to Sambavan. He started scaling the high-rise wall
holding on to the crevices and protrusions. He reached the latticed window and
spent some time seeing through it. Then he scaled down the wall.

“Do you want me to jump out through that latticed window? Is that the only way
to reach the target?”

“No, not at all. Only rats can get through that aperture. But if you see through
that window you’ll have a glimpse of the Chozha King’s Palace. And you can
also see the most important place in the Palace.”

“You mean Sundara Chozhan’s bedroom?”

“Yes. You can watch the people’s moments there through this latticed window.
Now come with me. And observe what I do.”

Ravidasan bent down his head to examine something on the floor. He placed his
foot on a round stone pressing it hard and while remaining in that position he
gripped a square-shaped stone with both his hands and pushed it hard. A passage
appeared below.

“Oh My God! A secret passage within the underground chamber!”

“You are right. No one else but the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and his Junior Queen
know about this passage. I am the third person to know. You are the fourth. Did
you see how I opened the entrance?”

Sambavan nodded.

The two men went down through that secret passage. The light from the torch
disappeared.

The Mute Queen came out of her hiding place and in one giant leap reached the
entrance of the secret passage. She looked at the passage for some time. She
placed her foot down to get in. At the last minute she changed her mind.

She thought for a while. She then looked at the place where Ravidasan scaled the
high wall. She leapt to that place and scaled the wall in the same way Ravidasan
did. She reached the latticed window and sat on the place near it. She looked
through the window.

There was a garden adjacent to the wall. And beyond the garden was a beautiful

mansion. She had goose bumps when she saw the magnificent building. Her
intuition told her that somebody dearer to her than her own life lived there. She
also understood that the culprits using the secret passage had the motive of
hurting her dear one. She prayed to that Being of Love residing inside the depths
of her heart that she should be blessed with the skill and strength to foil the
attempts of those bloody villains.

As she was about to get down from that vantage point she looked at the balcony
of the beautiful mansion. She was shocked by what she saw there.

Ravidasan and Soman Sambavan were in the balcony hiding behind the pillars.
It was daytime and hence she could see the balcony clearly. Ravidasan no longer
held the torch. Sambavan was armed with a deadly spear. Ravidasan got the
spear from him and aimed at a spot inside the mansion. Mandhakini’s heart
skipped a beat. Thank God, he did not throw the spear. He just mimicked the
action. Then he returned the spear to Sambavan. The two men disappeared from
that place.

Mandhakini climbed down the wall. She hid herself never taking her eyes off the
entrance to the secret passage. A little later she could see the light of the torch
from there. The two men came out and closed the secret passage.

“Do you know how to open the entrance?”

“Yes, I do. Don’t worry. I’ll honour my commitment. Sundara Chozhan’s life
will be over by this Friday. You complete your part of the mission.”

“The Junior Queen will take care of Karikalan. We need not have to worry about

him. The little tiger has escaped from the sea and looks like it’s in Nagapattinam.
But this time he can’t escape. The two women devils that saved him are right
now in Thanjavur. I saw the boat-girl and the dumb bitch in the crowd that
barged into the Fort. That Vaishnava Fanatic is also here. So there is nobody to
save that little tiger, I mean Prince Arulmozhivarman. I am sending an assassin
to Nagapattinam. By this Friday the entire clan of Sundara Chozhan will be
destroyed.”

“What about Madhuranthakan?”

“Poor fellow! Let him live for some time. It is better that a fool like him
occupies the Chozha throne till our Emperor comes of age.”

Ravidasan and Soman Sambavan traced back their steps to the entrance of the
subterranean chamber.

Chapter 29 - The King’s Dharshan

After the two conspirators disappeared, Mandhakini came to the entrance of
secret passage. She carefully observed the spot. She then made an attempt to
open the secret door but could not. When Ravidasan opened the door she was
too far from him to notice how he opened the door. She knew in her guts that at
least one of the men would return to that spot sooner or later. So she decided to
wait there.

She was not disappointed, for Soman Sambavan returned to that spot after seeing
off Ravidasan. He had a torch in his hand. But the light was very faint now.
Soman Sambavan was bragging about his courage in the presence of Ravidasan.
Left alone his heart was gripped by a vague fear which was quite evident in the
way he looked around.

He sat near the entrance to the secret passage. He was scared. After a few
minutes the torch went off. He then started to glance at the latticed window
which was the only source of light. The light coming through the window was
gradually getting weaker and weaker. Once he was sure that the light had
completely gone and that the sun had set for the day, he tried to open the door to
the secret passage.

Mandhakini was now standing very close to Soman Sambavan. He had pressed
the right levers and the door opened. He was about to get in.

It was precisely at that time that he heard a long scream very close by. Soman
Sambavan had witnessed many scary sights in his life. He had heard many
strange sounds. But never in the past had he heard such a strange voice, which

he was sure, did not belong to any living human being. If at all there was
something called a ghost and if at all it had a voice it would be exactly like the
sound he heard just now. When he heard that strange sound for the first time he
hesitated. He waited for the echo to fade completely. But when he heard the
same sound for the second time, the hairs on his body stood straight. When he
heard the same sound for the third time, his courage evaporated and all his
strength vanished. He was in the grip of fear and started to run blindly in that
dark chamber.

As soon as he disappeared, Mandhakini stepped into that secret passage. After a
few steps down she hit level ground. She walked so fast that even if Soman
Sambavan had seen her getting in and came running behind her he could not
have caught her. For a moment it appeared that the way led to hell; for it was
dark and endless. Finally the path did end at one point in front of a high rise
wall. She could see a gap on the top. She could feel the presence of steps with
her hand. As she tried to climb those steps something hit her head. Between the
steps of the secret passage and the place which hit her head there were some
openings large enough to let her in. She entered one of them and came out on the
other side. She could see gigantic figures in the place. Mandhakini was familiar
with the giant-sized statues in the Lankan Island. So she was not shocked by
what she saw. She carefully noted down the place where the path ended.

There were many giant-sized statues there. The ten-headed demon king Ravana
was trying to uproot Kailash Mountain, the abode of Lord Shiva and Goddess
Parvathi. The divine couple was seated atop the hill. The place where Ravana
had lifted the hill had become a valley. His twenty hands bore the weight of the
mountain.

Mandhakini saw through the gap between the two hands of the Demon King.
She now knew that she had entered the Hall of Sculptures of the Chozha Palace.
Nobody would have noticed that there was a path beneath the huge statue of
Kailash Hill. Nobody would have thought of exploring that path. It was a perfect
hiding place.

Mandhakini spent a few hours marvelling at the secret passage that was hidden
beneath a statue in the Hall of Sculptures. Then she went around the hall. There
was not much light there. But because Mandhakini was used to moving in forests
in dim light she could see everything very clearly.

At one place there was a statue depicting the Chozha Emperor Sibi giving a
piece of his flesh to save a dove that was being chased by a vulture. Chozhas
were given the epithet Sembian because they were descendants of the great
Emperor Sibi. The Mute Queen spent some time looking deeply at the sculpture
and then moved away.

Another sculpture showed the perennial Ganges River flowing from the head of
Lord Shiva. Bhageerathan was standing by the side reverentially folding his
hands towards the Lord.

The river first known as Bhageerathi flowed into the mouth of a gigantic Rishi
and then flowed out through his ears. A short Rishi was taking water from the
Ganges in his kettle. That Rishi must be Sage Agasthya. He emptied the contents
of his kettle on another mountain. The river that flowed from the kettle got
bigger and bigger as it came down. That was River Cauvery.

They must have made arrangements for water to flow when the sculpture was
originally installed there. But there was no water now. River Cauvery became
long, turned at several points and passed through mountains and large gardens
full of dense trees.

There were a lot of temples of Lord Shiva on the either side of the river. At the
point where River Cauvery fell in the sea the Hall of Sculptures ended in a wall.

Mandhakini placed her hand on the wall and pressed. A small door opened. She
came out through the door and landed in the Royal garden. The Palace towers
and balconies appeared close by.

Mandhakini looked around. It was late in the evening. The lights were fading.
There was nobody in the Royal garden. There were many fallen trees in the
garden as there were in Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace. Even if somebody had been
there in the garden they would not have seen her getting out of the Hall of
Sculptures.

Mandhaki stood near the Hall of Sculptures waiting for darkness to set in. There
was a likelihood of that Devil armed with a spear coming at that time. She was
looking into the Hall of Sculptures every now and then.

The lamps in the castle came to life one by one. In a few minutes the palace was
bathed in the light of oil lamps. The light from the lamps in the lower chambers
escaped the palace buildings through the windows. The lamps in the terrace
competed with the stars.

Oh My God! The night looks more dangerous than the day, thought Mandhakini.

She carefully scanned all the directions with her sharp eyes. She discovered that
there were not many lamps in the part of the palace that was adjacent to the Hall
of Sculptures. She remembered the place. It was exactly in this place where the
villain who tried to kill her dear one, Ponniyin Selvan, (the one she personally
saved from River Cauvery), had stood a little while ago along with his
accomplice. It was in this place that Ravidasan got the spear from the other
person and took an aim as if he were going to throw it on somebody. There were
not many lamps in this area. What could probably be the reason, she thought.
But right now the lack of lamps provided her a cover of darkness.

As soon as the sun set completely and the Royal garden was enveloped in a sheet
of darkness, Mandhakini ran towards the Palace as fast as a frightened deer. She
reached the Palace building in a matter of seconds. That part of the Palace had a
lot of round enclosures covered in sloping roofs. The sloping roofs were
supported by an array of pillars. At several places there were steps that led to the
upper chambers of the Palace. In those enclosures she could find large copper
vessels normally used to cook feasts for a large number of people. There were
also many old ivory palanquins and discarded thrones. Mandhakini glanced at
those objects for a while. Finally Mandhakini got enough courage to climb a
flight of stairs. There were round enclosures at the first floor as well. But the
pillars that supported the roofs in the first floor had a lot of artwork on them. The
windows were artistic too. There were a lot of marble benches on which the
members of the Royal household probably sat to enjoy the moon-lit nights.

Mandhakini went around the seemingly deserted rooms and verandas in the
terrace. She was afraid to go to the interior portion of the terrace. She saw light
at one place. She hid herself behind a pillar and looked on.

OH MY GOD!

She saw something from which she could not take off her eyes.

In a large enclosure there was a huge cot which had a lot of art work on it. A
person was lying on the bed. There were four women and two men standing
around the man. Mandhakini could infer from her hiding place that the people
standing were devoted to the person lying down. A little away stood two maids
who were even more reverential.

There was only one lamp in that enclosure. And that was fixed in a niche near
the bed. The light was faint. Mandhakini saw those standing around the cot. One
of them was a person who was dearer to her than her own life - her brother’s
daughter, Poonkuzhali. She had seen others earlier albeit from a distance. But
she did not remember or recognise them now.

Mandhakini hesitantly moved her eyes to the person lying in the cot. Her heart
stopped.

Yes. He was the one. He was the one who stole her life and her heart when she
was a little girl. But that happened several aeons ago. He was the one whom she
had met in the Ghost Island when she was a little girl roaming around the forest
without any care in the world. Yes, He was the one who had converted the Ghost
Island into a heaven for some time. Yes, he was the one forcibly taken away from
her by those people who came in large numbers in a large ship. Oh My God!
How time has changed him!

All those events happened so long ago that Mandhakini thought they must have
happened in her past life. Yes, she had seen him several times after that, every
time without his knowing about it.

When he went on the luxury boats in River Cauvery she had hidden herself
behind the bushes and had seen him. When he went on the streets in the golden
chariot drawn by pedigree white steeds imported from Arabia she was in the
crowd cheering him. But she had not seen him recently.

But my God! Why has he changed so much in so short a time? Why has he aged
so much so fast?

He now sported a moustache and a beard. There was no flesh on his cheeks. The
skin had gone dry. There were wrinkles on his forehead.

Oh My God, what happened to the magnetic light which used to glow in his
beautiful eyes? Do men change so much in so short a time? Mandhakini had
seen many people in the Lankan Island who were afflicted with the poisonous
fever and who were about to die. And this man closely resembled those people.

Oh My God! His face which used to shine like a golden sun has completely lost
its sheen. Perhaps his end is near.

Mandhakini suddenly remembered the scene that she witnessed a few hours ago.
Ravidasan and his accomplice were standing at the place where she was standing
now. It was from this place did they take an aim with a spear.

Oh My God! Did they aim at the person lying in the cot? The mere thought made
her body shudder. She was losing her balance. She felt like fainting. She held the
pillar nearby with all her might to avoid a fall.

Chapter 30 - The Charge

The Emperor was in a very bad state. He was shattered –in mind and body.
Prince Kunthavai had told the Chief Minister that the Emperor did not have even
a wink of sleep on the night of the storm. It was not an exaggeration.

Even during the day his mind was in a mess.

Later in the afternoon the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar came to see him. And his
words only served to aggravate the Emperor’s agony.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar charged the Chief Minister of several offences. Ever
since the Chief Minister came to the capital the security arrangements at the Fort
were lax.

Quite a lot of people now entered the Fort on the pretext of seeing the Chief
Minister. This might compromise on the security of even the Emperor, he
cautioned. Of course the Emperor brushed these charges with a smile. He did not
consider them worthy of investigation.

But the Emperor could not brush aside the further charges levelled against the
Chief Minister. The Junior told the King that on that day there was a scuffle
between the King’s Bodyguards, the Velakkara Army and the people who came
from outside.

He said that heated words were exchanged between the bodyguards and the
people and the situation could have worsened into a civil disturbance.

But fortunately the Junior crossed the place at that time and a major clash was
averted. The Junior also said that he talked to both sides and made sure that the
warring factions went away in peace.

The next charge against the Chief Minister was graver still. The Chief Minister
was known throughout the country as a man of high morals. But, the Junior
complained, his conduct during the last few days was not worthy of his name or
stature.

The Chief Minister had forcibly abducted a woman from Kodikkarai and had
brought her to the capital. And that he used the palanquin and the men of
Pazhuvur Palace for the shameful act.

The Junior told the King that he could not refuse a request coming from the
Chief Minister and that he instantly obliged him with the men and the palanquin
from the Pazhuvur Palace.

And now that the Minister had used them for a dishonourable purpose the shame
would be on the Pazhuvur clan, he argued.

The final charge centred on a suspicious occurrence.

“I was worried because a Sorcerer was visiting my brother’s palace quite often.

As the Sorcerer was coming at the instance of the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur I
could not directly take any action against the suspicious visitor.

"Nevertheless I appointed a spy to keep a watch on the movements near my
brother’s palace. The spy reported to me today that somebody jumped the wall
of the Chancellor’s Palace.

"I sent more men to apprehend the trespasser. My men caught the offender. And
it turned out to be none other than Azhwarkkadian, the darling disciple of our
Honourable Chief Minister.

“Why did you scale the wall?” - I asked him. He refused to reply. He also said
that he was acting on the orders of the Chief Minister. If the Chief Minister
stoops to this level... well, how can I handle the security of Thanjavur Fort.? “

"As my brother is not in town I had to trouble you with this information.”

The Emperor’s agony worsened.

“Leave it to me. Aniruddhar is coming to see me this evening. I’ll ask him to
explain his actions. I am deeply hurt by his act of abducting a woman from
Kodikkarai. Are you sure it’s true? Have you checked?”

“I have absolutely no doubts, Your Majesty. The palanquin bearers and the
soldiers who accompanied them are the direct eye-witnesses to what happened.
They reported everything to me yesterday midnight.

"According to their account they were caught in the storm as they were
approaching the Thanjavur Fort. A tree had fallen down and it appears some
were crushed by it. They were relieved to find that the tree did not fall on the
palanquin.

"Thank God we are not guilty of killing an innocent woman. Your Majesty
should hold an enquiry on this incident. And Your Majesty should also enquire
Azhwarkkadian.”

The Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar took leave of the Emperor. He did not want to be
there when the Chief Minister came to see the King. He had his own fears.

The Minister might pose some embarrassing questions to him. More importantly
if the Chief Minister got the Emperor’s sanction to open the Royal Treasury for
Flood Relief it would be a greater problem. Then he would not be able to face
his brother.

The Emperor was expecting Aniruddha Brahmarayar right from the morning.
But the Minister came only in the evening when the sun was about to set.

The Minister, generally a strong person, appeared shaken that day. Even though
he had planned his actions meticulously to the last detail it had backfired.

He thought he would have some news about Mandhakini and then he could meet
the Emperor.

That was the reason he had been postponing the meeting till it was very late.
And Azhwarkkadian brought more bad news.

He reported that he went to the alley where he suspected the Mute Queen would
have probably gone. And he reported seeing a lady jumping Pazhuvettaraiyar’s
wall.

And he was sure that it was Mandhakini. Before he could look for the lady he
was apprehended by the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men.

“Master, I could not tell the real reason to them. I had to use your name to free
myself.” - Azhwarkkadian said.

This made him even more anxious.

“There are so many palaces inside the Fort. Why should she choose the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s Palace? I can’t even openly search the place. But let’s see. In
a way it’s better that the Senior is not in town at the moment.

"I’ll place my men around the Palace. I have my man inside the Palace as well.
I’ll send word to him to keep an eye for the lady. But this boat-girl has caused so
much of embarrassment for me.”

“Master, even if the boat-girl had not intervened, there is no guarantee that
Mandhakini Devi would have acted in the manner you liked. She would have

tried to run away.”

“But I have hopes. Having come thus far she would not go back without seeing
the Emperor. Let’s try, Thirumalai. But it won’t be fair to delay my meeting with
the Emperor any further. I want you and that boat-girl to accompany me.

"We should tell the Emperor whatever we know about the Prince. If the boat-girl
who actually rescued the Prince and rowed him to safety told the story herself
the Emperor will be convinced.”

Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar, his disciple Azhwarkkadian and
Poonkuzhali walked into the Palace late in the evening.

Princess Kunthavai and Vanathi were waiting for them at the entrance of the
Palace. Kunthavai was disturbed by the fact that Mandhakini Devi could not be
traced.

She was even more disturbed on knowing that the Mute Queen had trespassed
into the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s garden. She was worried over the possible
disastrous consequences this may entail.

“Minister Sir, I hear that there is an underground exit from the Pazhuvur Palace.
What if the lady escapes by that route?”

The Minister was reminded of Vandhiya Thevan.

“Devi, it is not that easy to find out that exit. Not everyone will be as lucky as
Vandhiya Thevan. But I have not ruled out that possibility. I have placed my men
outside the Fort as well.”

He then went into the Emperor’s bed chamber leaving Poonkuzhali and
Azhwarkkadian with Kunthavai.

The Minister paid his respects to the Emperor and Queen Vanamaadevi. He then
explained the reasons for his delay. He was busy in assessing the damages
caused by the recent floods and organising relief work.

The Emperor was a little pacified on knowing about the relief work.

“It’s good you were here in the absence of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.

But what is this I hear? Did you forcibly abduct any woman from Kodikkarai?
The Commander of the Fort, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar told me a little while ago.

"My dear Brahmarayar, I never expected this kind of a conduct from you. There
might be a very strong reason for doing that.

"In that case you should have informed me upfront. Or perhaps you all think that
you need not share any information with me because I am ill, because I am an
invalid lying on my bed all day doing nothing?

"Kunthavai tells me that Arulmozhivarman did not drown and that he is safe at
the Buddhist Monastery in Nagapattinam. I don’t know whether I should be
happy or sad. If he is alive why hasn’t he come to see me till now? Why nobody
has told me that he is alive till now?

"Minister, I am afraid that so many things are happening around me and I am
kept in the dark. So many things are happening in my kingdom. I am wondering
why I should continue to live......”

The Emperor choked. There were tears in his eyes.

The Chief Minister maintained silence because he did not want to interrupt the
Emperor.

He broke his silence with forceful words.

“Stop it, My Lord. Please stop talking like this. We have been friends for forty
years, my Lord. And during these forty years I have not done anything against
your interests. And I won’t do in future as well.

"Yes, I kept a few matters to myself with the good intention of not disturbing
you when you are ill. That was out of my love and respect for you.

"If you think I have wronged you, please forgive me, Your Majesty. And now I’ll
answer all your questions.

I request you to please listen to me.”

“Chief Minister, I don’t think I’ll be peaceful in this birth. I am not sure whether
I’d get that eluding peace in my next birth too. When my children and my
dearest friend and Chief Minister are engaged in a conspiracy against me.... “

“My Lord, you’ll soon know who are conspiring against you. I am not part of
that conspiracy gang. I am retaining the Minister post only in name. I have told
you several times that I’ll hand over the Minister post to the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. Even now I am ready, Your Majesty. I’ll give my post to him
and walk out empty handed even if you have the slightest doubt on my loyalty…
“

“Yes, Minister. You are always ready to desert me at the slightest provocation.
The only person who is going to be with me till I breathe my last is this woman,
my wife, the Malaiyaman’s daughter.

"I have committed a lot of sins; but I must have done some good deeds on the
side. For otherwise, I would not have got this angel as my wife in this life.”

Vanamaadevi heard these words and broke into a sob. She then ran out of the
room.

“Oh, King of Kings, whatever you said about your wife is true. And your
children born of her divine womb are all fiercely devoted to you.”

“But they don’t respect my words, Minister. They don’t obey my orders. They
do whatever they like to do. And you are always on their side.

"You knew from the beginning that Arulmozhivarman is alive and that he is in
the Buddhist Monastery at Nagapattinam. Why didn’t you tell me earlier?”

“Please forgive me, My Lord. I was not sure of that till yesterday. I was sure of
one thing though - that the Prince would be blessed with long life. The
astrologers were quite unanimous when they cast the Prince’s horoscope at the
time of his birth - that he’d live long and attain glorious heights in life. I never
thought that those predictions would become false.”

“Chief Minister, there is no limit to the havoc wrought by astrology and
astrologers. I am thinking of sending all the astrologers into exile.

"Some people have placed a heavy reliance on the astrological predictions
concerning Arulmozhi and want to crown him as the King even while I am alive.
Aren’t you one of them, Minister?”

“I promise I am not, my Lord. On the other hand I thought that it would be better
if the Prince doesn’t enter the Kingdom for some time. When I went to Srilanka I
told my views to the Prince himself.

"As soon as I left Lanka, Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men came to Lanka to apprehend
the Prince. And Your Majesty, it has happened with your full blessings.

"This news has spread throughout the country. And the people are quite furious
with the Pazhuvettaraiyars. In fact the rumour is that that the Pazhuvettaraiyars
sunk the Prince’s ship and drowned him in the sea.”

“Lie, Minister. It’s absolute falsehood. Parthibendran has told everything to me.
The Prince did not come in the ship sent by the Pazhuvettaraiyar brothers.

"He came in Parthibendran’s ship. And the Prince, of his own accord, wantonly
jumped into the sea. And he did that to save somebody else from another
burning ship. And he jumped in spite of Parthibendran strongly advising against
that rash act.

"Now when I think of it I know everything is a lie. And they were all fabricated
mainly to deceive me. When I think that Princess Kunthavai too is a part of this
conspiracy....

"I couldn’t bear that, Minister. I never could bear that kind of a treachery from
my darling daughter, who is dearer to me than my own life.

Even if the whole world goes against me I thought Kunthavai would be on my
side. And I shared with her something which no father would share with his
daughter.”

“Oh, King of Kings, even if the whole world accuses Kunthavai of conspiring
against you, I won’t believe that. You shouldn’t believe that either. If the
Princess holds back something from you then she should have a strong reason
for that.

"It’s a fact that the Prince jumped in the sea to save his friend. The boat-girl who
rescued both the Prince and his friend and then rowed them to the shore is
waiting in the ante-room. She was an eye-witness to what happened in Srilanka.
Shall I call her, Your Majesty?”

“Oh! Call her right now, Chief Minister. Was she the one you abducted from
Kodikkarai?”

“Yes, My Lord. I’ll call her now.”

The Chief Minister clapped his hands.

Azhwarkkadian and Poonkuzhali entered the Emperor’s bed chamber.

Chapter 31 - The Evening Dream

The Emperor looked pointedly at Poonkuzhali.

“I don’t think I have seen this girl earlier. But her face looks very familiar.
Brahmarayar, who’s she?”

“She is Poonkuzhali, daughter of Thiagavidangar of Kodikkarai.”

“Oh, now I understand.”

And then spoke in a whisper to himself. ‘Yes, she resembles her aunt. She
reminds me of her. But there are a lot of differences.’

Poonkuzhali heard the words spoken by the Emperor, even those he whispered to
himself. She had not seen him so far. She had heard that the Emperor was more
handsome than even the God of Love. The person who had begotten such a
handsome Prince had to be like that, thought Poonkuzhali. But what was she
seeing today? She saw the Emperor’s form - the one which was laid waste by
disease and stress inherent in a King’s life. She was shocked. She had come there
to fight with the Emperor. Now she was ashamed that she entertained hostile
thoughts towards this shattered old man. Fear, a sense of awe and above all a
sense of shyness overwhelmed her so much that she forgot to pay her respects to
the monarch.

“Hey Girl, how is your father, Thiagavidangar? Is he doing fine?”

The Emperor affectionately enquired.

Poonkuzhali was jolted to the present. She then remembered that she was
standing in the presence of an Emperor who was wielding sovereignty over a
vast area that extended from Srilanka in the South to River Krishna in the North.
She prostrated before Sundara Chozhan. She stood up and folded her hands
reverentially towards him.

Meanwhile the Emperor voiced his doubts to the Chief Minister.

“Can this girl talk? Or is she also dumb like her aunt?”

The King’s face shrunk in unbearable agony when he posed the question

“She can talk, Your Majesty. She can talk what nine women can talk at a time.
She is still reeling under the shock of seeing you in person.”

“I don’t know why everybody becomes silent on seeing me. Nobody shares
anything with me these days.”

The Emperor turned his attention to Poonkuzhali again.

“Girl, The Chief Minister tells me that you saved Prince Arulmozhivarman from
drowning. Is it true?”

Poonkuzhali hesitated and spoke in a barely audible whisper.

“Yes, my Lord. If it is.... an offence..... .”

The Emperor laughed. Given his condition the laugh sounded quite hysterical.

“Brahmarayar, did you hear her? ‘If it is an offence... ’ She has saved the Prince
and says, ‘if it is an offence... ’ Looks like I want to see my son drowned.
Somebody has told this girl that I am such a heartless demon. Chief Minister, do
the people of this country think of me in the same way?”

“My Lord, please ignore her words. She is in the grip of fear. Hey Girl, the
whole Chozha country is indebted to you for saving the Prince. The Emperor is
pleased beyond words. You can name your reward and get that from us at the
right time. Now tell the Emperor what happened on that eventful day. You need
not have any fear in your mind.”

“Let this girl tell this first. She says that she saved the Prince from the sea. But
how did she know that it was the Prince? Has she seen him earlier?” - The
Emperor asked.

“Yes, my Lord. I have seen the Prince when he boarded the ship to Lanka along
with the army. Once the Prince called me “Samudra Kumari””

“Aha! The girl has regained her powers of speech!” - The Emperor was
sarcastic.

Then on being questioned by the Chief Minister Poonkuzhali recounted
everything from the time she took Vandhiya Thevan in her boat to Srilanka till
she dropped the Prince at Nagapattinam. But the Chief Minister had already
warned her not to breathe anything about Mandhakini.

The Emperor was pleased.

“Girl, what you have done to this country and the Chozha clan is quite
invaluable. I am afraid I cannot compensate you enough for your efforts. But I
have a question. You rescued the Prince and brought him to our shores. Then
why didn’t you bring him here? Why did you take him to Nagapattinam?”

“My Lord, the Prince had a terrible fever. He was delirious. We knew that there
are good doctors at the Buddhist Monastery at Nagapattinam. Hence we took
him there. We also knew that the monks there worship the Prince. Again given
the Prince’s condition at that time, he could travel only by boat and not on a
horse-back or a chariot. That way Nagapattinam was the ideal destination.”

“Didn’t you know that Pazhuvettaraiyar was camping at Kodikkarai at that time?
Why didn’t you tell him?”

Poonkuzhali hesitated only for a fraction of a second. Then she replied in a
fearless voice.

“Your Majesty, the whole country knows that Pazhuvettaraiyar has been working
against the interests of the Prince. How can I entrust a sick Prince to his avowed
enemy?”

“You are right. Pazhuvettaraiyars are my sons’ enemies. Not only them, even I
am their enemy. That’s how the whole world thinks. Chief Minister, the storm
we had here yesterday night should have been even more severe in the coastal
town of Nagapattinam. I am afraid that the Prince might be in danger.”

“My Lord, ours is a blessed country. And we are in the best of our times.
Hence... “

“Yes, the Chozha Kingdom is blessed. But I am cursed. Chief Minister, I want to
see my sons at least once before I die.”

“Please don’t utter such words, Your Majesty. Who else in this word is blessed
the way you are? You are blessed with good children, my Lord. I’ll send my men
to Nagapattinam to bring back the Prince safely to the Capital. I will also send
my disciple Thirumalai for the purpose.”

Only then did the Emperor cast his glance on Azhwarkkadian.

“Oh, he too is here! The Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was complaining about him.
Didn’t he jump the wall of the Pazhuvur Palace?”

“He has a good reason, my Lord. Permit me to explain everything tomorrow.
You are already exhausted, Your Majesty.”

The Empress, Princess Kunthavai and Vanathi entered the chamber at that time.

The Empress spoke to the Chief Minister.

“Minister, let’s stop with this for the day. The Doctors are particular that the
Emperor should not strain himself.”

The Queen knew what the Emperor needed at that moment. She spoke to the
Chief Minister again.

“I hear that this girl has a beautiful voice. Ask her to sing a song from Thevaram.
The Emperor loves music.”

“As you please, Devi. I’ll also ask my disciple to sing some composition of
Azhwars. He too sings very well, Devi.”

Poonkuzhali sang a composition by Saint Thirunavukkarasar.

Once the Saint was suffering from a killer disease. He was passionately pleading
to the Lord, ‘You haven’t removed this disease yet, my Lord. And the disease is
like the Lord of Death constantly tormenting me.’

Then Azhwarkkadian sang a pasuram from the Azhwars. One of the Azhwars,
on having a vision of the Lord, tells in that song how he saw the Lord’s consort,
the Holy Mother, then the Lord’s golden form and goes on to describe his
glorious vision.

The Emperor closed his eyes as soon as the singing started. Minutes later his
troubled face glowed in peace. His breathing was now soft and regular. It was
clear that the Emperor had lapsed into a deep sleep.

The lights were fading outside. A maid lit a lamp inside the chamber. Everybody
left the room. The Empress lingered for a while looking at the sleeping form of
the Emperor.

Princess Kunthavai who was in the adjacent room signalled to her mother. The
Queen walked out of the room. But for the rhythmic breathing coming from the
Emperor the room was absolutely silent.

The Emperor had not slept the previous night. The songs sung by Poonkuzhali
and Azhwarkkadian were quite soothing to his distressed mind. That made the
sick Emperor to fall asleep. But his was not a deep sleep. Old memories, new
memories, real life incidents and imagined incidents manifested as dreams.

The Emperor was on the boat with Poonkuzhali as his companion. Poonkuzhali
was singing in tune with the majestic sound coming from the deep sea.

Oh mind, don’t lose hopes

Your dreams will come true one day
A long, dark, stormy night
Is followed by a bright day
The world comes to life
The lotus shivers in happiness
The beetles are ecstatic
And the sun rises in the East.

Sundara Chozhan was ecstatic on hearing this song. All his tiredness was gone.
He was happy and refreshed.

He was urging Poonkuzhali to sing more. The boat was floating steadily in the
deep sea.

Suddenly a cloud of darkness enveloped them. There were strong winds. There
were waves which resembled moving mountains. The boat which was gently
rocking like a cradle now touched the skies one moment and fell down to the
depths of the ocean, the very next. The sails of the boat were shattered by the
winds. Somehow the boat managed to stay afloat. The Emperor was awe-struck
by the way Poonkuzhali managed to steer the boat during the storm.

Suddenly the winds stopped. The sea calmed down. The waves died down.
There were signs of sun-rise in the Eastern horizon.

Soon the sun rose like a golden ball of fire. The sea shone like liquid gold in the

rays of the morning sun.

There were islands full of green coconut groves at a distance. The birds in those
islands sang in a sweet voice. The Emperor knew that those islands were near
the Lankan shores. It was in one of those islands that he met Mandhakini in one
of his past births.

The Emperor spoke to Poonkuzhali without taking his eyes off those beautiful
islands -

“Poonkuzhali at last you’ve taken me to heaven. How am I going to thank you,
dear?”

Poonkuzhali did not respond.

The Emperor looked at her again. He was stunned. Because it was not
Poonkuzhali. It was his dear Mandhakini. Mandhakini had not changed during
the past thirty years.

The Emperor did not know what to do. Then he gathered courage to talk to his
lady love.

“Mandhakini, is that you? Is that really you? Did you come in the form of
Poonkuzhali to take me here?”

Then he remembered that Mandhakini could not hear him. He looked at her face.
She must have understood him by watching his lip moments. There was a smile
on her face.

The Emperor tried to stand up to go near his lady love. But he could not get up.
Only then he remembered that his legs had become useless long ago.

“Mandhakini, I’ve become sick. I can’t come to you. You should come to me.
Listen, Mandhakini. Even If somebody comes here with an offer to make me the
King of the Three Worlds, I won’t leave you. I’d ask them to go to hell. Let’s not
go to these islands near Lanka. Somebody will be disturbing us there every now
and then. Steer the boat away from these islands. Let’s cross the seven seas and
reach the island at the end of the world. Nobody can disturb our peace there.”

Mandhakini smiled as if she understood his words.

The scene shifted.

Emperor Sundara Chozhan, his Queen and his children were having a joy ride in
River Cauvery. They were on a boat which was designed to look like Raja Hams,
the celestial bird. The country’s finest musicians were entertaining the King. The
Emperor was enjoying the music. His eyes were closed.

He was jolted by a scream coming from the other side of the boat.

“Oh My God! WHERE IS THE CHILD? MY GOD, WHERE IS PRINCE

ARULMOZHI?”

The Emperor opened his eyes. He looked around.

A woman was holding his darling son, Arulmozhi. The woman was virtually
standing on water. And she was trying to drown the Prince.

The Emperor could not contain his fury. He was about to jump into the river
when he saw the face of the woman. He recognised the evil face of Mandhakini.
The recognition paralyzed him. He fell down on the boat with a loud thud.

The sudden fall woke him up from the horrible dream. He could not sleep any
longer.

The bed-chamber was very cool, thanks to the rain and the storm. And yet the
Emperor was bathed in sweat.

He was a tad relieved when he realized that whatever happened till then was just
a dream.

He looked in front of him. There was nobody in the room. An oil lamp lighted
the room.

He thought that others would have left the room because he was sleeping.

He first thought of clapping his hands to call them back. Then he decided against
it.

Let me wait for some time. Let me recover from the shock of my evening dream.

He heard a faint sound coming from the terrace. What could that be? He turned
towards the direction of the sound. He saw a figure coming down from the
terrace. The figure was holding the pillar for support. Was it also a dream or
reality? Or was it a hallucination?

Chapter 32 - “Why Do You Torment Me?”

Sundara Chozhan was surprised.

I see somebody coming down from the terrace through the pillars. Who can that
be? He remembered the confusing dreams he had.

Is this a continuance of the dream? Have I not woken up fully yet?

The Emperor closed his eyes for a whole minute and then opened them again.
He looked in the direction where the mysterious figure got down from the pillar.
He could not see anything. He concluded that it must have been a hallucination.

He remembered what happened before he dozed off to sleep. The Chief Minister,
his disciple, Azhwarkkadian and Thiagavidangar’s daughter who sang in a sweet
voice had gone. The Empress and the maids were waiting for his call in the
adjacent room.

The Emperor remembered the manner in which he spoke of his daughter,
Princess Kunthavai, to the Chief Minister. Wasn’t he complaining about her? He
felt a strong sense of remorse. Kunthavai’s planning and intelligence was
unmatched. She had thought deeply over the matter and finally decided to keep
the Prince at Nagapattinam to prevent any possible civil commotion in the
Kingdom. And to belittle her forethought had been his greatest blunder, mused
the Emperor. Sundara Chozhan knew very well that his mind was not at its best
in the recent past.

The Princess did nothing wrong. Why then did I blame her? It is prudent to leave
everything to her decision. The first priority now is to bring the Prince from
Nagapattinam. Oh My God! He should not have been caught in the storm and
the floods. I should ask Kunthavai about it right now.

Sundara Chozhar decided to clap his hands to call those waiting for him in the
next room.

But what is happening? I can sense some movement near the head of my bed.
But the sound of the footsteps is very soft - something like those of a cat, a tiger
or a leopard. Who is that? Is that my Queen? Or my daughter? Or a maid?
Perhaps they do not want to disturb my sleep. That is why they are walking
softly.

“Who is that” - The Emperor asked in a soft voice. There was no response.

“Who is that? Come before me.” The Emperor shouted. There was no response
even now.

The Emperor had a sudden flash.

Is it her? The woman whose only mission in life is to confuse and frighten me?
Or her ghost? The devil that came in my dream has come in person as well. She
used to come only at mid-night. Now she has come early in the evening, that too
fully dressed and bejewelled? Or perhaps it is already midnight? Have I slept
that long? Perhaps that’s why my Queen and my daughter are not here with me.

The maids have gone to sleep too. Oh My God! They have left me all alone. And
if this is that devil she won’t let me be in peace. She won’t leave me till my heart
bursts in shock and grief.

“Devil! If it’s you, then for heaven’s sake, come before me. Torture me in
whatever way you can. And then leave me alone. I can’t simply stand your
hovering near the head of my bed, completely invisible to me? You are killing
me.

Come before me. Come to my presence. Have you come to draw my blood? Kill
me with the knife you use to kill the tigers and bears of the forest. But, please, I
beg of you, please don’t hurt my children. Yes, I have wronged you. But don’t
take revenge on my innocent children. They have never hurt you. They never
even thought of doing so. Tell me, what wrong did I do to you? Did I ask you to
jump from the light house and kill yourself? You did that on your own. Why are
you tormenting me?”

Sundara Chozhan felt the presence of the mysterious figure very close to him.
His body trembled in fear. He felt as if his intestines had coiled up and blocked
his chest. And that his heart rolled up and blocked his throat. He felt as if his
eyes were bulging out of his face that they may soon fall down.

Yes, it’s her. The fisherman’s daughter, who has been torturing me for a long,
long time. No, it’s not her but her ghost! The ghost has come for its ultimate
revenge. It is now thirsty. For blood. It wants to draw blood. Blood for blood!

Either the ghost will stab me or might wring my neck and suffocate me to death.
Let her wish be fulfilled. What’s the point in my living? I won’t be of any use to
anybody. And if the ghost kills me now, then it won’t hurt my children. It’s better
that way.

Sundara Chozhan felt that if only he lifted his head a little and look deeply he
would see the ghost of Mandhakini. It appeared as if the mysterious figure was
very close to his head. He could even feel the ghost’s shadow falling on him. He
wanted to lift his head to have a look. At least once. But he could not gather
enough courage for that scary task.

Let me close my eyes tight. Let it do whatever it wants to.

The Emperor did not move. Nothing happened. A sharp knife did not pierce his
heart. Nor did some ghostly hands wring his neck. It appeared as if the ghost had
moved away from him.

No, she would not let me die so easily. She would rather prefer to keep me alive
so that she can torment me whenever she feels like it. Somehow she managed to
escape my eyes today. Let me call somebody. If there are other people around,
she will vanish.

“Anybody there? Where have you all gone?” - The Emperor shouted before he
opened his eyes.

Oh My God! Who is standing at the foot of my bed? Yes, it’s her. There is no
doubt about it. It’s that mute ghost. And like a typical ghost she has let her hair
loose. I can see blood on her forehead. Perhaps she is telling me in sign
language that she has come to draw blood. Blood for blood! My blood!

Sundara Chozhan shouted at the figure as if he were possessed.

“YOU DUMB DEVIL! You tortured me with your silence even when you were
alive. And you are torturing me with your silence even now. Why have you
come here? If you want blood, take it. Take all the blood in my body. It’s all
yours. Why are you standing like that? Why do wear that pitiable expression on
your face? Have you come to demand anything else? Then tell me. What do you
want? Tell me. If you can’t talk at least show some signs. Don’t torture me by
just standing before me doing nothing.

“Why are your eyes brimming with tears? Are you crying, by any chance? I
can’t stand it. If you have something to say, please speak. Or else, get lost. You
won’t go? You refuse to go? Why are you adamant? Aren’t you the one who
tried to smother my son, my little innocent child to death, in Cauvery? Because
of God’s grace it didn’t happen. Your plan did not succeed then. Nor will it ever
succeed in future. Because God is on my side. Devil! Why are you staring at me
trying to tear my heart off my chest with your sharp eyes? Go! Go! Get lost! You
won’t go? Well, I’ll drive you out of this place. I’ll make you go.”

The Emperor looked for something handy to throw at Mandhakini. There was a
small oil lamp near him. It was sturdy as it was made from an alloy of five
metals. The King picked up that lamp. “Go. Get lost, you hungry ghost!” The
King shouted while throwing the lamp aiming for Mandhakini’s face. It was like
the Lord Vishnu releasing his Golden Disc. The lamp was still burning as it flew
towards the hapless woman.

At that time the figure whom the Emperor thought was a ghost moaned in
unbearable grief.

It was a high pitch moan. The Emperor’s body shrivelled. His body, the flesh and
bones inside his body and even his bone marrow froze.

Fortunately the burning lamp missed its target. It fell before the ghost-figure
with a reverberating sound.

The lamp went off. And yet the room was not dark. There was another lamp in
the other side of the room. Sundara Chozhan saw the figure still standing there
in the faint light. There was inexplicable grief on the face of the figure. The
figure looked at the Emperor longingly for a second before attempting to go.

It was at that time that the doubt first appeared in the Emperor’s mind.

Is it the ghost of Mandhakini? Or some lady who is almost like her? Or her twinsister? Or perhaps... perhaps... perhaps... it’s Mandhakini herself? Then didn’t
she die? Is she still alive? Whatever I have been thinking till now is wrong. And
if it’s her then Oh My God! What have I done? I tried to throw the lamp at her
and kill her. What a cruelty! What a heartless act! That explains the change in
her expression. Her face shone in sympathy for a while. And then it plunged into
grief. No ordinary grief. Grief that cannot be expressed in words.

Was she hurt by his cruel act? Oh My God! That’s why she is trying to go. She is
looking on all sides. She is planning to run away.

“Are you there! Are you the Fisherman’s daughter, Mandhakini? Or her ghost?
Or her sister? STOP! STOP! Don’t go. Please tell me truth before you leave.
PLEASE!”

As the Emperor was hollering at the mysterious figure several people entered the

chamber at the same time making a terrible noise. The Empress, Princess
Kunthavai, Vanathi, Poonkuzhali, the Chief Minister, his disciple
Azhwarkkadian rushed into the room together.

“STOP. Don’t let her run away from here. Ask her why she came here?” - The
Emperor screamed.”

Everyone was shocked. The rage on the Emperor’s face and the horror in his
voice shocked them. They were even more shocked on seeing Mandhakini Devi
at that place. They remained frozen for a moment.

The Chief Minister assessed the situation and inferred what could have possibly
happened when they were away. He asked Poonkuzhali:

“Hey Gal, is she your aunt?”

“Yes, Minister Sir.”

He then barked orders to his disciple.

“Thirumalai, why are you standing like a statue? Mandhakini Devi is trying to
run away. Stop her! It’s the Emperor’s command.”

For the first time in his life Azhwarkkadian defied his Master’s orders.

“You could have ordered me to stop a cyclone, Master. That could have been
easier.”

Poonkuzhali ran to Mandhakini and caught hold of her shoulders. Mandhakini
threw her niece’s hands and ran away.

Azhwarkkadian acted smart. He ran to the door. He bolted it and stood guard
near it. Nobody could open the door either from inside or from outside.

Mandhakini Devi now looked like a deer surrounded by hunters. She decided
that there was no other way to escape except the route she had taken while
coming in. When she looked at the terrace everyone understood her plans.

The Emperor was delirious:

“Stop her! Catch her! Ask her why she came. Ask her whom does she wants to
kill.”

Mandhakini was preparing to go to the terrace through the pillar near her.
Poonkuzhali ran up to her. This time Poonkuzhali did not try to stop her. She
spoke to her in sign language. Mandhakini seemed to understand her signs and
pointed out the oil lamp lying in the floor.

Princess Kunthavai understood the signs.

“Appa, did you throw the oil lamp at Periamma?”

“Yes, dear. I could not bear the look of that ghost. I threw the lamp to drive her
away.”

“Oh, my dear father, she is not a ghost or a spirit. She is very much a living
woman, the best among women. She is my Periamma. She is very much alive.
Ask the Chief Minister. He’ll tell you everything.”

Kunthavai told her father and ran to the place where Poonkuzhali and
Mandhakini were engaged in a wordless conversation.

The Emperor saw his daughter going near Mandhakini.

“Dear, don’t go near her. That devil might harm you.”

The Emperor tried to get up from his bed. His love for his daughter made him
forget the fact that he could not stand on his own.

The Empress held the Emperor’s shoulders affectionately and made him lie on
his bed.

“Be patient, my Lord. Nothing will happen to your darling daughter. She is in

safe hands.”

Chapter 33 - The Goddess Of The Chozha Clan

Princess Kunthavai went near Mandhakini. Mandhakini looked deep into the
eyes of the Princess. What the Princess did next was a surprise to everybody in
the room. She prostrated before Mandhakini and touched her feet.

Mandhakini’s eyes were full. She bent down, lifted the Princess up and hugged
her. Princess drew her closer and then joined her right hand with hers. While
remaining in that position she slowly led Mandhakini to the Emperor.

It was only then the Empress saw the face of Mandhakini. She saw blood on the
forehead of the Mute Queen. She turned to her husband.

“My Lord, was it you who threw the lamp at her and hurt her? What have you
done, my Lord!” - The Queen almost screamed.

“No, no. The lamp I threw did not reach her. She was like this even before I
threw the lamp. But this evil woman might put the blame on me. And you’ll only
believe her words. I know that all of you are on her side. Oh Malaiyaman’s
daughter! I am surprised you too have a soft corner for this devil. Do you know
who she is?”

The Empress roared.

“I do, my Lord? She is my Goddess. She is the Goddess, the presiding deity of

the Chozha Clan. When my dear son Arulmozhi was about to be drowned in
River Cauvery, he was saved only by the grace of this Goddess.”

“Oh My God! You too believe that story? Did Kunthavai ask you to believe such
incredible stories?”

“No, My Lord. I am just describing what I saw with my own eyes. Kunthavai
was a child at that time and she could not have known. She saved our son
Arulmozhi on that day. Earlier she saved you from the clutches of a bear at the
Ghost Island in Srilanka. She saved you for the Chozha Kingdom. But for her,
the clan would have lost a wonderful Emperor. That’s why I am worshipping her
as the Goddess of the Chozha clan.”

“Oh My God! you know that too? And do you know that she has been alive all
these days? And not dead as believed earlier?”

“I know, my Lord. I was telling our Chief Minister to bring her somehow from
Srilanka.”

“Chief Minister, did you hear the Queen? Is she really that Fisherman’s
daughter? Is she still alive? Didn’t you say that she is dead? Did you lie to me? I
thought her evil spirit came often to torment me. Was that all mere
hallucination? I am already in a state of confusion. And now you have all joined
hands to make me absolutely mad. God bless you all.”

“Your Majesty, she is the one. It’s true. She is alive. I am the one who’s guilty,
my Lord. There is no scope for a pardon. Even then I have hopes on your
mercy..... Your Highness”

“Chief Minister, now I know. This is the woman whom you forcibly abducted
from Kodikkarai. You said that the woman who came in the palanquin was this
boat girl. Even that’s a lie, Minister.”

“King of Kings, please have mercy on me. I beg your pardon.”

“Aha! Begging my Pardon! Good joke! I think this is the first time in the history
of the world that a person described as an Emperor and King of Kings was lied
to and deceived. Why did you hide things from me? Why didn’t you tell me
earlier? You were talking to me for a long time this evening. You could have told
me at least at that time. But you didn’t. It’s only now things have become clear
to me. I see the truth in what Pazhuvettaraiyars say. You have all joined hands to
conspire against me.”

“I concede, Your Majesty, this is a conspiracy. But the conspiracy is not against
you. The only thought we all had in our minds was to somehow bring this lady
to you. I learnt from the Queen that you were still grieving over the death of this
woman. That prompted me to take this decision. The Queen concurred with me.
She virtually ordered me to do so. But it was not easy to bring this woman, Your
Majesty. If I tell you that she is alive without producing her before you, you’ll
find it difficult to believe. That’s why I decided to bring the woman somehow to
your presence and then tell the story. Mandhakini Devi had come till the gates of
the Fort yesterday and then she vanished. This boat girl came in her place in the
palanquin. We spent the whole day today looking for Mandhakini Devi. My
disciple saw her climbing the wall of Pazhuvur Palace. And then he did the same
thing only to apprehend her. But she was not to be seen inside the palace either.
Meanwhile my disciple was caught by the guards of Pazhuvur Palace. Your
Majesty, I beg of you to kindly pardon my disciple for that trespass.”

“Is that the only offence which needs a pardon? There are many. Continue the

narration.”

“We waited till evening. We looked for her inside the Pazhuvur Palace. She was
not found. When you were sleeping we were in the adjacent room talking about
this lady. We suspected that the lady might be hiding somewhere around here
and we did not know how to tell you that. And now the lady has come to your
place herself. The fruit that slipped from the hand has fallen into milk.”

The Emperor then looked in the direction of Mandhakini. Kunthavai and
Poonkuzhali were giving first aid to her. They used a wet cloth to gently wipe off
the blood and applied cool sandal paste over the wound.

The Emperor asked Poonkuzhali.

“Vidangar’s daughter, ask your aunt how she got hurt.”

Poonkuzhali came forward and spoke reverentially.

“I asked, Your Majesty. But I can’t understand her words.”

“What does she say? Does she by any chance say that the wound was caused by
the lamp I threw at her?”

“Not at all, Your Highness. She says that she hit against a hill. And that she did
not notice that she was bleeding.”

The Emperor did something totally unexpected. He started laughing aloud. For
years nobody had seen the Emperor laughing so loudly and so happily. It
appeared as if he thought of something funny again and again and his laugh
became louder and louder. Everyone was watching him with concern.

“Chief Minister, why are you staring at me? Are you thinking that I’ve become
mad once again? Not at all! You want to know the reason for my laugh? This
lady is telling that she hit upon a hill. And that too in the Chozha country. How
can I not laugh, tell me! Why talk about a hill? There is not even enough stone to
make a small statue here in Chozha Kingdom. Even if somebody wants to throw
a stone at the Chozha Emperor he has to import it from outside. And now this
lady claims that she hit against a hill in Chozha Kingdom. What hill did he hit
against? Poonkuzhali, why don’t you ask her?”

Vanathi was listening to this conversation. Her face glowed all of a sudden. She
understood. She came two feet forward and paid her respects to the Emperor.

“Your Majesty, I know what she says. I’ll be happy to share my knowledge if I
have the permission of Your Highness.”

“Kodumbalur Princess! You too are here? I didn’t see you till now. I am
surprised that you have not fainted in this melee. Tell me what you think about
the lady’s words.”

“This Devi said that she was hurt because she hit against the hill. I think I know
what she means.”

“What is that? I know you are a smart girl. You might have understood the real
reason. Come on. Fast! Tell me! Does she want to say that she hit against a hill
in Lanka and came here bleeding?”

“No, my Lord. There’s a hall of sculptures in the Palace Garden. In that hall
there’s a sculpture depicting the Demon Ravana holding the Kailash Mountain
aloft. Perhaps she hit against that mountain.”

Everyone was surprised at Vanathi’s beautiful insight.

“May be.”

“Quite Possible.”

“That’s it.” - People were exclaiming while glancing at Vanathi with admiration.

Princess Kunthavai placed her hand on Vanathi’s forehead. And then she
mimicked the gesture to ward off evil eyes.

“You are a genius, my dear. That didn’t strike us at all. I am very happy, dear.”

Poonkuzhali was looking at the scene with raw fury in her eyes. She then spoke
to her aunt in sign language and relayed the conversation to the audience.

“Yes, that’s what she says. It’s the mountain in the Sculptures Hall that hit her. I
too would have guessed it right had I seen the hall earlier.”

The Emperor was now staring at Mandhakini.

“Yes. She did not know where to go. And hit against the sculpted mountain. We
don’t know where she wanted to go. She arrived here at last.”

The Minister responded to the Emperor.

“She wanted to meet you, Your Majesty. There is no doubt about it. She was
looking for a way to do it. I was telling these people that she won’t go without
seeing you.”

“I don’t believe that, Chief Minister. If she had wanted to come she could have
come earlier. She did not turn up for twenty five years. Why should she come
now? Why should she haunt me like a ghost? Yes, yes. I thought she was dead
and was hovering in the Palace as a ghost. In a way that’s also true. Wasn’t she
roaming the dense forests of Lanka like a ghost? All the time I spent my life
indulging in the royal pleasures of a Palace. I don’t have words to describe the
power of nemesis. I don’t know how many times I was shocked in the past
seeing this woman’s ghostly form. Who knows? She might have come on earlier
occasions too by stealth to see me. I was terrified because I thought she was a
ghost. Oh My God! Twenty five years! Twenty five long years! Twenty five
centuries! Twenty five aeons!”

The Emperor was speaking to himself. He suddenly stopped and turned towards
the Minister,

“Chief Minister, didn’t you seek my pardon for your crimes? May I know what
are you guilty of?”

“Your Excellency, it’s neither proper nor just to ask the accused to read out his
own charge sheet.”

“Then whom can I ask? Well, I need not ask anybody. The crime is written
clearly on your face. It’s as clear as the writing on the wall. You told me that this
lady fell into the sea and killed herself. That’s a lie. You’ve been repeating the lie
for the past twenty-five years. And I believed you. Minister, yours is a heinous
crime.”

“Your Highness, I am not the only one to be charged. This lady is an accessory
to the crime. It is true that she fell into the sea. She was rescued. It was almost a
rebirth for her. She made me promise to her that I should never reveal to you that
she is alive. I refused to give such a promise. Then she threatened to kill herself.
I had no other go, Your Majesty. Now is the time, Your Majesty. You can ask her
whether I speak the truth.”

“No need, Minister. Let it be like what you said. Even then it doesn’t change the
fact that you all joined hands to conspire against me. That was what I said
earlier. It’s not wrong.”

“I do concede, Your Highness, there is no pardon for the grave offence I
committed. I have been carrying this in my mind for several years. The load has
been lifted today. I am free now. Please relieve me, Your Highness. I am
planning to go to Srirengam to serve my Lord Renganatha. I want to spend the
rest of my life in His service, Your Majesty.”

“Impossible, Chief Minister! Your crime has led to many a confusion. It is your
duty to clear them before serving Lord Renganatha.”

Chapter 34 - Ravana In Danger

The Emperor spoke softly to his daughter - “Kunthavai, I need to discuss some
sensitive political issues with the Chief Minister. You may all go out to attend to
your work. When you go out, take “ this” with you. Let your mother be with me
for some time.”

The way the Emperor referred to Mandhakini as “this” showed his hatred for her.

Kunthavai looked at her father with disappointment in her eyes. The Emperor
noticed her expression:

“It is better to check on this woman. Did she really hit against Mount Kailash
sculpture in the Hall as she claims? Take her there to find that out. I can’t bear
her standing here.”

Kunthavai’s face fell. She held Mandhakini’s hand and led her out of the
chambers. The Empress came near Kunthavai and whispered into her ears.
“Darling, isn’t she horrible to look at? What’s the point in blaming your father?
Take this lady with you and show all your artistic talents on her. Make her a
beautiful woman and bring her back.”

Kunthavai smiled to acknowledge the wonderful suggestion coming from the
Empress. Vanathi and Poonkuzhali went along with her.

Sundara Chozhan looked alternately at the Empress and the Chief Minister.

“I don’t know why you did this to me. If you think that this will make me happy
then I’m sorry to say, you’re grossly mistaken. Chief Minister, why the hell did
you take so much effort to bring that barbaric creature from Kodikkarai? Tell me
the truth at least now. At least from now on please do not hide anything from
me.”

The Chief Minister’s response was quite emotional:

“Your Highness I’ll never repeat the same blunder again. I will never hide
anything from you. I tried hard only to bring out the truth. You were torturing
yourself because you thought this woman died because of you. I thought that you
had forgotten that altogether. Later I came to know that you could never forget
that; or forgive yourself for that. The Empress told me that on many days you
dreamt about this woman and shrieked in the middle of the night. The grief of
the Empress was much more than yours, Your Highness. She asked my advice
on the matter. We started working on this, Your Highness. You thought that you
were responsible for the death of that woman. So we thought that the best way to
remove your guilt is to produce the lady before you. We could not think of any
other way to assuage your feelings of guilt. We thought you won’t believe us
unless you see her in person. That led to all this mess, Your Highness. If you
think our motives are wrong, we seek your forgiveness.”

These words actually added fuel to the fire.

“Yes, it’s wrong. It’s a crime. Till today she was haunting me as a devil. She was
disturbing me in my dreams. And you have replaced the ghost with a mad
woman. Do you think that this will give me happiness? Never! If only you had
consulted me before, I would have vetoed the idea of bringing her to my

presence. You were all over-enthusiastic. I will let this pass. You took enormous
trouble to bring her here. Tell me how are you going to dispose her off?”

The Chief Minister was rendered speechless with this outburst.

The Empress stepped forward to speak.

“My Lord, I don’t have any idea of letting my sister go away. Let her stay with
me in this palace. I will shower my love on her as if she were my elder sister.”

“Devi, there is no need to prove your love for me by these gestures. I have
known in the past twenty five years of living with you, that when it comes to
loving one’s husband, you are better than even the legendary Kannaki. Ever
since I was afflicted with this dreaded disease you have even neglected your
children to look after me. I know what you are doing for me. I know the fast and
penance you undertook for my sake. And you need not let a mad woman who till
now was roaming in a forest, live with you to prove your love for me. Now,
listen to me, Oh Malaiyaman’s daughter! And this is for you too, Chief Minister.

“Somewhere in the past when I was staying alone in an uninhabited island I saw
this dumb, mad woman. It’s true that I fell in love with her. I am not denying
that. But if you think that I am still longing for her company, there cannot be a
greater blunder than that. There were so many reasons for my falling in love
with her at that time. And that love has now changed into hatred and even
disgust. She now torments me in my dreams and even in reality. I can’t even bear
to think that she is living in this Palace. Drive her out. Right now! I thought she
was a ghost and hence threw the oil lamp at her. If I had known that she was
alive I don’t know what I would have done to her.”

The Empress and the Chief Minister were devastated by the revulsion in the
Emperor’s voice. They never expected the Emperor to be so cruel. The Chief
Minister thought that the Emperor might admonish him only for the earlier lie.
The Empress thought that the Emperor might not praise her openly; but inwardly
he might appreciate her thoughtful act of bringing the first love of his life.

They were disappointed by the Emperor’s words. They were furious with the
Emperor. They even started hating him for his harsh words.

And the Emperor’s final outburst was the worst.

“The world won’t lose anything if this dumb, mad woman dies. If only she had
died when she fell into the sea... it could have been much better. Which idiot
saved her?”

The Empress could not bear it any longer.

“My Lord, I beg of you. Please don’t talk like that. Our elders have said that of
all the sins committed by man, ingratitude is the worst. You can even forget the
fact that your life was once saved by this woman. But how can you afford to
forget the fact that our darling son Arulmozhivarman is alive today only because
of her? You can, my Lord. But I can’t. I will be indebted to this angel in all my
fourteen births.”

“Devi, why are you repeating the old story now?”

The Empress did not let him complete.

“That’s not a story, my Lord. That’s a fact. Arulmozhi told me. He told me that
the same angel who saved him from the floods in River Cauvery also saved him
from dangers in Lanka. Thank God he is safe at Nagapattinam. Let him be
brought here, my Lord. You can find out the truth from him.”

“Yes, yes. Arulmozhi is in Nagapattinam. But what is the guarantee that he is
safe? Was he caught in the yesterday’s storm? I am worried, dear. Chief Minister,
I am restless. I have lost my peace. I have a strong premonition that a calamity is
about to happen to my clan. And this dumb devil coming here at this time looks
like a bad omen to me.”

“No, my Lord! Definitely not! The divine woman coming here is definitely not a
bad omen. I will say that her presence here is possibly the best security for our
clan. I am sure my Holy Mother Durga Parameswari, pleased by my constant
prayers, has sent her here.”

“No, not at all! She was not sent by Durga Parameswari, but by the Saturn, the
evil God. Send her away. If you fail to do that I’ll do it myself.”

“My Lord, I beg of you, please grant me this boon. Let the woman stay in our
Palace till Arulmozhi comes here.”

The Queen’s voice was choked. And to strengthen her prayer she bowed down
and touched the Emperor’s feet.

“Did you hear that plea, Chief Minister? The passionate plea coming from
Malaiyaman’s daughter. The plea coming from a woman who still believes that
all that glitters is gold. I don’t think there can be anybody in the world half as
gullible as her. She has never asked anything from me till now. And the very first
boon she has asked from me is like this. What can I do, tell me. I don’t have the
heart to refuse her request. But take it from me, every minute the dumb devil
stays in this palace will be hell for me. So make arrangements to bring the Prince
from Nagapattinam immediately.”

“As you wish, Your Highness. Shall I openly send our cavalry and our elephantregiment to bring back the Prince or else… “

“You want to bring him in disguise. In stealth. Without anybody knowing it.
Right? And you think if the Prince were to come here openly there will be chaos
in our Kingdom. Right?”

“I don’t just think, Your Highness. I know for sure. The people are agitated for
various reasons. They are waiting for some excuse now. And if they have it there
will be a revolution. I can’t say what will happen to the Pazhuvettaraiyars and
Madhuranthakan.”

“What are you talking, Chief Minister? If people become unruly then what
happened to our vast army? Can’t they quell the violence?”

“The army is even more agitated than the people, Your Highness. People will at
the most shout a few slogans and walk away. But our army won’t rest until they
demolish the Thanjavur Fort, imprison the Pazhuvettaraiyars and
Madhuranthakan and place Arulmozhi on the Chozha throne.”

“It seems you too want the same to happen. People are confused by the cock and
bull stories woven by some foolish astrologers. But have this firmly in your
heart. My cousin - my grandfather’s brother’s son - Madhuranthakan is the only
rightful heir to the Chozha throne. I have decided to make him the Emperor. I
don’t care if people object to that. I don’t care even if the gods or the Holy
Trinity opposes my decision. And if my sons oppose my decision... well they
had it.”

The Empress intervened.

“That will never happen, my Lord. Your sons will never go against your wishes.
Arulmozhi is not enamoured by the throne. The Lankan Crown was offered to
him literally on a platter. He refused it. Do you think that a person of such a
calibre will go against your wishes? What about your elder son, Karikalan? It
was you, my Lord, who made him the Crown Prince. That was the only reason
he accepted that position. Should I tell about his strength and valour? He is
capable of creating a kingdom for himself with the help of his sword. But he too
is not interested in being the King. You just have to tell him what’s in your mind,
my Lord.”

“He is afraid that I might tell that to him. He doesn’t want to hear that from me.
That is why he refuses to come here. I have sent for him many times.”

“Your Majesty, the Crown Prince has built a golden palace for you at
Kancheepuram and is waiting for you.”

“I know what he is waiting for. You know Kamsa of mythology? Kamsa threw
his parents behind bars and became the king. In the same way this son of mine
will put us in prison and then ascend the Chozha throne. I don’t know whether
he has built a golden palace or a treacherous palace of lac, like the one built by

Kauravas to kill Pandavas.”

The Empress was shocked.

“Your charge against our son Karikalan is quite terrible. I can’t bear to hear it,
my Lord!”

The Chief Minister told in an emotional voice.

“The Emperor’s mind has been poisoned by the evil elements.”

“Nobody can poison my mind except my own son, Karikalan. If he is truly my
son why didn’t he come here in spite of my repeated requests?”

“He must have strong reasons, my Lord.”

“Why don’t you guess at least one of those strong reasons?”

“People say that if Karikalan crosses River Coleroon he might be arrested by the
Pazhuvettaraiyars.”

“Somebody has spoilt my son’s mind. I know who did that. Probably this
woman’s father, Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman. And another person is Kodumbalur

Velar. Perhaps you have also joined the gang, Chief Minister.”

“My Lord, I never talk behind people’s backs. A short while ago you talked
about some danger and the strong sense of premonition. That’s true, my Lord. A
calamity awaits the Chozha clan. That can come in two ways. There are two
different conspiracies happening against our clan right now. The
Pazhuvettaraiyars and the Sambuvaraiyars.”

“Stop it, Chief Minister! The Pazhuvettaraiyar clan has been serving our clan for
more than a hundred years. The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar has fought in twenty
four battle-fronts and has sustained sixty four wounds for the sake of our
country. Instead of saying that such a man is working against the interest of
Chozhas you can very well say that the sun has lost its light. That will be more
credible, Minister.”

“Your Highness, even the great sun is caught in an eclipse once in a while. Our
scriptures say that a great fire is there underneath the cool waters of an ocean. I
am not talking about that, Your Majesty. I am not saying that the
Pazhuvettaraiyars are working against the Chozha clan. I am only saying that
they are desperate on crowning Madhuranthakan.”

“What is wrong in that, Minister? What is wrong in desiring the Crown for the
only son of the greatest devotees of Lord Shiva, the great Kandaraathithar? And
Madhuranthakan is after all the rightful heir to the throne.”

“I do not deny that, Your Highness. You have come forward to give the throne to
Madhuranthakan. Then how can Pazhuvettaraiyars be blamed. They are only
working overtime to carry out your wishes.”

“Hence they deserve more gratitude from me and my family.”

“But, Your Highness, they also do certain things without your permission. They
are planning to divide the Chozha Kingdom into two parts and give the one
South of Cauvery to Madhuranthakan and the one north of Cauvery to
Karikalan. That is the discussion currently going on in Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace.
Your Highness, do you agree for splitting this great country? Remember Your
Majesty, it took more than a hundred years of struggle for your ancestors like
Vijayaalaya Chozhan, Adithya Chozhan and the Great Paranthaka to consolidate
and expand the borders of this magnificent kingdom from Srilanka to Godavari
in the North. Do you agree to break the great Kingdom, Your Majesty?”

“Chief Minister, I will never, never consent to that absurd idea. I will rather ask
them to split me into two before splitting the Chozha Kingdom. I don’t think
Pazhuvettaraiyar will take part in such a disastrous act. I don’t believe that,
Minister. Perhaps he is doing that out of his love for me. Perhaps he wants to
give at least half the kingdom to my son. But if only he knows that I don’t like
the split he’d abandon the idea. I will make Madhuranthakan the King. And I’ll
see to that his Kingdom is not even an inch less than the one I ruled. I won’t care
even if the people oppose me. I won’t care even if Pazhuvettaraiyar opposes that
idea. I’ll listen to none. Is that clear?”

“Your Highness, you can ignore Pazhuvettaraiyar’s opposition. Your sons are not
going to oppose you. But these are not the only blocks in making
Madhuranthakan the King. The opposition is coming from a much higher place.
The opposition comes from a lady whom the people of Chozha Kingdom
worship as a Goddess. I tried talking to her a few days ago... “

“I know you are referring to Queen Mother, Sembian Madevi. Somebody has
poisoned her mind too. She thinks that I want to crown my son. Chief Minister,
please make arrangements to bring her here immediately. I’ll change her mind.”

“Your Highness, it is easier said than done. The great Saint Kandaraathithar has
given the orders to his wife before he died. I was with him when he died. I still
remember his words. “Madhuranthakan should never be crowned. I have a very,
very strong reason. Only my wife knows it.” Those were his exact words.”

“Chief Minister, is there really such a strong reason against Madhuranthakan
becoming the King? Do you know that, Minister?”

“If only I had known that I would not have waited till you ask for it, Your
Highness. You will have to know it only from the Queen Mother when she
comes here.”

“Yes, that is still nagging my mind. Make arrangements to bring the Queen
Mother immediately. I will remove the block in her mind, however large or
however complex it may be. Who can we send to bring her? I’ll send my
daughter, Kunthavai. She is the right person. Devi, please bring Kunthavai here
immediately.”

The Empress was listening to the conversation between the Emperor and the
Chief Minister. But a part of her mind was with the mute queen. When the
Emperor asked her to bring Kunthavai she rushed to the ladies chambers. She
was startled to see Kunthavai, Vanathi and Poonkuzhali in a state of shock. The
Empress knew the reason straightaway. Mandhakini was not there.

When the Empress asked Kunthavai about her, Kunthavai burst out.

“Amma, you wanted me to beautify the kind lady. But it was the most difficult
assignment, Amma. We forced Mandhakini to have a bath which she reluctantly
did. Then we adorned her with new dresses. Vanathi was combing her hair.
Poonkuzhali was preparing flowers for her. As I was taking out the jewels for
her I heard her shriek. I turned around. Mandhakini Devi was not there. As soon
her hair was combed and braided up she freed herself from Vanathi and ran
away. We could not see her in any of the rooms. We are still looking out for her.

The Empress smiled benevolently.

“Was there a mirror opposite to her?”

“Yes, Amma. At some distance from her.”

“She must have seen her on the mirror. She must have been overcome by
shyness. She must have run to hide herself. Look for her in all the places. She
might have probably gone to the garden attached to the ladies chambers. She is
used to scaling walls and going through the windows. Don’t give up.”

They all went to the garden. She was not there. They all became anxious. They
first thought of informing the King and the Chief Minister. As they were turning
to go they heard a loud noise. It appeared as if somebody was hitting a stone
with an iron tool. They now knew that the sound came from the Hall of
Sculptures. They sent a maid to fetch an oil lamp. And then went into the Hall of
Sculptures. A strange sight awaited them there.

Mandhakini now dressed in the best silks of the Palace was wielding a sword
with a long handle. She used the sword to strike the hands of the Demon Ravana

who was holding Mount Kailas in his hand in the sculpture. The sculpture was
very strong and hence it did not yield to the blows from the sword. But it
appeared that the demon in the sculpture might soon be in danger. Twenty hands
of the demon king were bearing the mountain. Even if one or two hands are
broken the entire weight of the mountain would shift to his heads. And the heads
might be shattered with the weight of the mountain. Kunthavai and others
entered the hall precisely at this point of time.

When Mandhakini saw them she dropped the sword and smiled at them.
Everybody except Poonkuzhali thought that Mandhakini was after all a crazy
woman. And it was no wonder the Emperor hated her.

The Empress told others in a stern voice:”Girls, let nobody breathe about this
incident in the presence of the Emperor.”

Chapter 35 - The Emperor’s Anger

At the time when Mandhakini was discovered in the Hall of Sculptures by the
other women a heated argument was going on between the Emperor and the
Chief Minister.

“Your Highness, I did not want to discuss certain things in the presence of
women. But now a time has come that I can no longer hold them back from you.
The personal body guards of the slain king Veera Pandiyan are roaming around
in our country. They are anxiously looking for the right time to fulfil their deadly
vow.”

There was a scornful smile on the Emperor’s face.

“That is old news, Minister. Pazhuvettaraiyars have strengthened the security
arrangements for me precisely for that reason.”

“My Lord, you know about those crooks. But you may not know that those
conspirators are funded from the Chozha Treasury.”

“What is this new yarn you are spinning now?”

“I have much more wonderful yarn to spin, Your Majesty. The new gold coins
from Pazhuvettaraiyar’s underground treasury were placed in a heap before those
conspirators. Here is a direct eye-witness, my disciple, Azhwarkkadian. He is

ready to lay bare the details if you so wish, Your Highness.”

“No need. The Pazhuvettaraiyars have been shedding blood for the Chozha clan
for so many generations. Even if the legendary king Harichandra, known for his
honesty, were to tell me that the Pazhuvettaraiyars are funding those conspirators
who want to kill me, I won’t believe him.”

“I beg your pardon, Your Majesty. I am not levelling such a grave charge against
the Pazhuvettaraiyars. Perhaps the gold coins are going to the conspirators
without their knowledge.”

“Impossible, Minister. Can anybody die without the knowledge of Yama, the
Lord of Death?”

“If Yama in his old age had married a young woman even that is possible, Your
Highness.”

“I also do not like the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar marrying at this age. I have
spoken my mind to him on this matter. But that alone is not sufficient to charge
him with sedition. I can’t bear it.”

“My Lord, I am not accusing the Pazhuvettaraiyar. I am accusing his young
wife.”

“I can bear your maligning men but not a hapless woman. Especially one as
miserable as his young wife. It is disgusting, Minister!”

“However disgusting it may be, I have a duty to disclose certain matters about
the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. Once I held back the truth. And I have been
regretting that decision till this day. You too were angry with me for that a short
while ago. So I have decided to share with you whatever I know. Please give me
a patient hearing, Your Highness.”

The Emperor was pleased by the clever words of his wise Minister. He smiled.

“You are directing my own words against me? Good. No offence taken. But
remember that was purely a personal matter. There is absolutely no relationship
between the two. Even then I am ready to hear you. Go ahead.”

“Nandini Devi walked into the Pazhuvur Palace three years ago as the bride of
Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Since that date some sorcerers have been coming to the
Palace quite frequently. Even the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar knows about it. He too
hates those sorcerers. But he could not go against his elder brother.”

“Ideal brothers! What affection!”

“But, their brotherly love should not harm the country’s interest, Your
Highness.”

“What harm has happened to the country, Minister? Just because a crazy girl
foolishly believes in sorcery and has invited some sorcerers to do some tricks, do
you think the country’s safety is compromised? Or perhaps do you suggest that
the Junior Queen made me fall ill because of her sorcery?”

“Your Highness, the Pazhuvur Queen’s visitors are not really sorcerers. I
strongly suspect that they are conspirators in the garb of sorcerers. I suspect that
the country’s treasures are being robbed by them.”

“Anybody can cast aspersions on anything. Do you have proof, Minister?”

“Oh King of Kings, if only we search Pazhuvettaraiyar’s Palace and the
underground treasury we might get some solid proof.”

“Nobody has suggested anything more hateful than that. Chief Minister
Aniruddha Brahmarayar, listen. You are just a friend. And that too only to me.
But Pazhuvettaraiyar is the best friend of three generations of Chozha Kings. He
is like an iron shield to the whole clan. He is like the destructive Vajrayutha of
the chief of gods to the enemies of Chozha kingdom. How can I search the
Palace belonging to a man of such a stature? I will rather believe that my wife is
trying to poison me than believing that the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar is harbouring
criminals in his palace.”

“Your Highness, Pazhuvettaraiyar is innocent. Blinded my infatuation for his
young wife he does not know what is happening right under his nose. Without
his knowledge his Palace has become a sanctuary for the conspirators. I have
grounds to believe that the Junior Queen is part of the gang.”

“What further charges are you going to level against that innocent girl?”

“A few days ago a coronation ceremony was performed at the Prithvipathi’s War

Memorial in the forest of Thiruppurambayam. A five year old boy was made to
sit on a throne and was crowned as a Pandya King. Those who took part in this
ceremony vowed to destroy the Chozha clan without a trace.”

“Chief Minister, do you by any chance want to frighten me with this piece of
information? Do you expect me to shake in fear?”

“Not at all, Your Highness. I never gave a damn to that mockery. But I just
wanted to say that the Pazhuvur Queen was one among those who vowed to
destroy the Chozha clan.”

“Now tell me which super-intelligent guy saw that ceremony and shared that
information with you. Perhaps this disciple of yours?”

“No, Your Highness. Azhwarkkadian went there after the ceremony was over.
The one who saw it was the warrior of the Vana clan, Vandhiya Thevan.”

“You mean the spy who came here once and then ran away?”

“He is not a spy, Your Highness. He is the best friend of your dear son, Adithya
Karikalan.”

“Karikalan has so many friends like him. And each friend will have his own way
of seeing things. Let us assume what this man told you to be true. But we cannot
do anything about it. Pazhuvettaraiyar is not in station. The Junior Queen also is
not there. Let us discuss this issue after they come back. But Minister, after

hearing about the Pazhuvur Queen I am curious to see her.

“When Pazhuvettaraiyar told me that he had married a young girl I was so
disgusted with him that I forbade him from bringing his young wife in my
presence. Perhaps she hates me for that. As soon as Pazhuvettaraiyar comes back
I will ask him to bring his wife so that her hard feelings towards me are
removed.”

“A very good idea, Your Highness. I was about to suggest that. You need to
pacify her for other important reasons as well. I want your permission to let the
Lankan Queen stay in our Palace till the Pazhuvur Queen comes back.”

“Oh, you have crowned her the Lankan Queen? Have your way. Let her stay
here. But tell me the connection between her and the Pazhuvur Queen.”

“That is precisely what we should find out, my Lord. If the two women meet
face to face we will know the connection, Your Highness. That might even
soften Nandini’s heart and remove the enmity she has for the Chozha clan.”

“Chief Minister, I am surprised that you are so overly concerned with a woman’s
enmity.”

“I have strong reasons, Your Highness. But I am afraid whether it will be proper
to disclose them now.”

“If you don’t tell me then nobody else will. Please go ahead.”

The Chief Minister thought for a while and then started to talk.

“Your Highness, what I am about to say is a little complex. I don’t think you’d
like to hear this. But I beg of you, Your Highness, please listen to me.
Whosoever has seen Nandini and Mandhakini Devi are surprised by the striking
resemblance they bear to each other.”

“There are so many things like that in the world. Haven’t we seen a tree which
exactly resembles another? Likewise there is a mad woman who closely
resembles another. What is the big deal in that?”

“But a tree does not act like another. A mad woman does not act like the ghost of
another mad woman and torment the Emperor of a Kingdom.”

“What are you insinuating, Chief Minister?”

“You have been lamenting that Mandhakini’s spirit has been haunting you in the
nights… “

“Oh do you mean to say that her spirit did not come and that she came herself.”

“No, Your Highness. Nandini acted like Mandhakini’s ghost and tortured you.”

The Emperor sat up on his bed. His eyes went red and his body shook in anger.

“If what you say is true then I will wring the neck of that devil with my own
hands and... “

The Chief Minister did not let him complete the sentence.

“Please, Your Highness. Please don’t take such vows.”

“Why? Why are you soft towards her? The damned lady gave me real hell. No
punishment can be harsh for what she did to me.” The Emperor was furious.

“What if the tormentor happens to be a close relative... perhaps your own
daughter...? “

“Chief Minister, are you in your senses or what?”

“I have tested your patience, Your Highness. Please give a suitable punishment
for me. But don’t ever think of punishing Nandini Devi. She is not just the young
wife of Pazhuvettaraiyar. She is the daughter of the Emperor of the Three Words,
the Great Sundara Chozhan. Who in the world has the right to punish her, Your
Highness?”

The Emperor was stunned. He was staring at the Minister for a while. Then he
burst out into laughter.

“Your Highness today is a red letter day in my life, for I have seen you laughing
twice.”

“Chief Minister, I thought there is only one madcap in this Palace. I now realise
that you are a greater lunatic than her. The only difference between you two is
that she cannot talk while you can.”

The Emperor started to laugh again.

Chapter 36 - Late In The Night

The Emperor was still laughing when the women entered his chambers. First
came the Empress. She was followed by Mandhakini Devi held on two sides by
Princess Kunthavai and Vanathi. They were followed by Poonkuzhali and a
maid. They came in a formation. The women’s face brightened on hearing the
Emperor’s laugh.

Mandhakini lifted her face to see the Emperor and then looked down. The efforts
to beautify her had reached a perfectly logical conclusion. Kunthavai was
celebrated as the best beautician in the Kingdom in those days. And that made
many Chieftains in the Chozha Kingdom send their daughters to the Emperor’s
palace to learn the art from Kunthavai. She had lavished all her skills on the
Mute Queen.

By a strange intuition she had done Mandhakini’s hair like that of the legendary
woman-saint, Andal. And this made the Mute Queen strongly resemble Nandini.
As soon as Mandhakini’s hair was done every woman recognised the striking
resemblance between her and Nandini.

Unlike other women of her age Mandhakini had not adopted a sedentary life
style. She had been roaming in the forest all her life and this fact substantially
reduced the effect of the differences in age between the two women. Mandhakini
should be older than Nandini by at least twenty five years. But she looked much
younger than her age. The women felt proud in presenting Mandhakini to the
King. And every woman had her own reasons.

At that time in history it had been the practice of the Emperors and Chieftains of

Tamilnadu to have many wives. Wars were the order of the day. The young
Princes remained at the battle-front most of the time risking their precious lives.
The King married many women in his anxiety to leave an offspring. The Queen,
or the first wife, had to be adept in the art of being friends with her rivals - her
husband’s other wives. Absence of jealousy over the other women and the
ability to move with them as close friends were prized traits of an Empress. For
the reigning Empress, Mandhakini’s arrival afforded the best opportunity to put
that quality to the test. She came out in flying colours.

For Kunthavai it was the finest expression of her art. She was proud. For hadn’t
she changed the crazy looking forest woman into a beauty queen within a matter
of hours?

Poonkuzhali was dancing on Cloud Nine seeing the respect and hospitality
shown to her aunt. Wasn’t she treated on par with the reigning queen? She had
always thought that the women in the Palace would be vain and arrogant. But
contrary to her thoughts the women in the palace were soft, kind, courteous,
considerate and even loving. Poonkuzhali was happy beyond words. She was
relieved that her aunt had finally found her home.

The Emperor was still laughing when a procession of happy and proud women
entered his chambers. He glanced at the women. Mandhakini’s appearance jolted
him out of his laughter. It appeared as if he could not believe his own eyes. He
closed his eyes with his hands and then opened again to take another look.

The Chief Minister’s words were still lingering in his mind. The strong
resemblance between the figure that tortured him in the nights and the woman
standing before him now was quite evident. At the same time he was sharp
enough to notice a few differences. He now wanted to explore the mystery
further and know the full truth. However his hatred towards the mute queen
remained undiminished. But he decided to keep the hatred to himself for the time
being.

He addressed the Chief Minister:

“Minister, a few minutes ago I called you crazy. Now it seems that I am the
craziest of all. From now on in addition to the Doctor, send in a sorcerer too
every day. I won’t mind even if you send the same sorcerer who comes to see the
Junior Queen of Pazhuvur.”

The Chief Minister was shocked. He muttered a silent prayer - ‘Let not any of
those vile sorcerers come a mile near the Emperor.’

“Your Highness, why do we need a sorcerer? Why do we need sorcery at all
when we have the greatest of sorcery in our hands - I mean my Lord’s name?
The sacred name of Sriman Narayana.”

Kunthavai came forward to talk to her father.

“Father, did you send for me? Do you want me to go to Pazhaiyaarai? Father,
will you please let all of us women go together?”

The Emperor did not respond to her daughter’s pleas. Instead he spoke to the
Chief Minister:

“Minister, I have changed my mind. These girls look so enthusiastic for some
strange reason. Looks like they are celebrating the homecoming of a bride. I
don’t want to spoil their party. As you advised me a short while ago, let all these

women stay in the Palace. The Queen Mother Sembian Madevi has very high
regards for you. Why don’t you take upon yourself the task of bringing her
here? Send your disciple to Nagapattinam. I’ll send word to the Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar to bring the Senior and his wife to see me as soon as they
return to their base.”

“As you please, Your Highness. But it may take some time for them to reach
here. Thanks to the violent storm we had yesterday all our rivers are in spate.”

“No issues, Minister. I have been waiting for so many days. No harm in waiting
for a few days more. And if you make arrangements to bring Karikalan as well
we can resolve all the burning issues. And if he still refuses to come then I have
no other option than undertaking a painful journey to see him. But let us discuss
that later. I want you to go to Pazhaiyaarai tomorrow and bring the Queen
Mother here as early as possible. When you travel please do have an eye on the
damages caused by the storm. Find out whether any further relief measures are
necessary. We are focussing too much on the family issues and have forgotten
our primary duty - the welfare of our people.”

“No, my Lord. I have not forgotten that. Relief work is in full swing. Your
Highness need not worry about it.”

The Chief Minister took leave of him.

The Emperor had never felt so peaceful and relaxed in the recent past. The news
that Mandhakini had not after all died had lifted a huge burden off his heart. The
news that Prince Arulmozhi was safe in Nagapattinam deepened his sense of
peace and well-being. The Choodamani Monastery in Nagapattinam was housed
in one of the strongest buildings and hence no one living in the monastery was
likely to be affected by the previous day’s storm. He no longer worried for the

safety of his darling son, Arulmozhi. He felt rather strange when he ruminated
on the words of the Chief Minister that the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur might
probably be his daughter through Mandhakini. This made him smile quite often.

He was teasing the women in his room. He praised his daughter’s skills in
beautifying a woman.

“Oh My God! Dear, you have made a barbaric creature look like the wife of the
Chief of Gods, the Indrani. But tell me do you need to show your skills on an old
woman like her? You should show them on a young and beautiful creature like
this Vanathi.”

Then he sought for details about Arulmozhivarman from Poonkuzhali.
Poonkuzhali shared whatever she knew eagerly with the Emperor.

At the end of it she prayed to the King.

“My Lord, please allow me to return to Kodikkarai tomorrow morning. I need
not worry about my aunt anymore.”

“But what about your another aunt’s son who is down with fever? Should you
not be concerned about him? Don’t be in a hurry. Stay here for a few days.”

Poonkuzhali remained silent.

The Emperor slept well that night. He did not have many dreams. And whatever
dreams he had were good. The women of the Palace who slept in the next room
also had a peaceful sleep- except Mandhakini. She was restless. The day’s events
disturbed her a lot and did not let her sleep. Her thoughts hovered around the
underground treasury and the subterranean passage. She had planned to break
the hands of Ravana statue. That would have kind of closed the underground
passage. But the other women did not let her execute her plan. That made her
restless. She could not sleep with the Emperor being exposed to a grave risk. She
was staring at the decorated ceiling for a long time.

It was almost three in the morning. She saw a figure through the window that
opened to the terrace. She saw a scary face peeping through the window. She
was almost sure of the identity of that person. She woke up shocked. She saw the
window again. The face was not there. She got up and walked up to the entrance
of the next room. The door was open. She could see that the Emperor was in
deep, peaceful sleep. She went into the room to have a look at the windows. She
did not see anything.

She came back. She touched Poonkuzhali. Poonkuzhali did not move. She shook
her. Poonkuzhali woke up from a deep slumber. She was shocked on seeing the
expression in Mandhakini’s face. Mandhakini signalled her to follow her.
Poonkuzhali who loved her aunt and had high regards for her intuitive abilities
followed her.

Mandhakini walked towards the Hall of Sculptures. She took an oil lamp on the
way. Poonkuzhali was a little worried about her aunt’s behaviour. Was she going
to try to break the Ravana statue again? But then the sound was sure to wake up
others. And if they did it would be proved beyond doubt that her aunt had after
all lost her mind.

Poonkuzhali decided to stop her aunt. And if she went overboard Poonkuzhali
would snatch the hammer from her aunt’s hand. She followed her aunt into the

Hall.

What was that? She sensed movement in one of the heads of the ten-headed
demon. No, it was not the head of the statue. A human head had appeared in the
middle of the Kailash Mountain. And the human head vanished at once. Was it
real? Or an illusion? Or a hallucination caused by her not fully awake mind? Or
was it the dance of the shadows of the sculptures caused by the light coming
from the oil lamp?

Perhaps Mandhakini too saw the face. She went near the Ravana statue. Thank
God she did not pay attention to the sword lying nearby. There was a dark space
between the Ravana’s heads and hands and the Kailash Mountain. Mandhakini
lifted the lamp to illuminate the space. There was a gaping hole there.
Poonkuzhali’s earlier guess had been proved right. That was an exit for a secret
passage. It had been so cleverly hidden from view. Mandhakini tried to close that
exit earlier. But others could not understand her actions and inwardly labelled
her a mad woman. And they did not let her block the passage.

Poonkuzhali was absorbed in her thoughts when the mute queen asked her to
follow her. She got into the small hole and started moving ahead. First her aunt’s
body disappeared and then her head and finally the lamp she was carrying aloft.
Only a faint light coming from the lamp showed the way. Poonkuzhali
constricted her body to squeeze herself into the small passage. A few moments
later Poonkuzhali also disappeared. The light of the lamp faded out. The Hall of
Sculptures was plunged into darkness once again.

The Empress, Kunthavai and Vanathi woke up early in the morning and were
shocked to see that Mandhakini and Poonkuzhali were not in the places they
slept. They searched for them throughout the Palace, the adjoining garden and
even in the Hall of Sculptures. They were not to be found. How could they have
vanished from the highly guarded Palace complex was a mystery for the women
of the Royal household.

When the Emperor came to know of this at first he was a little worried. Then he
told in a loud voice as if to console himself.

“Good riddance. The crazy women have gone. That is important. How they
vanished is not.”

Even as he spoke those words a strange fear gripped his mind.

Chapter 37 - Kadambur Agitated

Ever since Adithya Karikalan arrived at the Kadambur Palace the residents and
the guests felt like they were treading on a bed of thorns and walking over fire.
No one could guess what kind of missiles would burst forth from the Prince’s
tongue.

The Crown Prince often insinuated about the conspiracy to enthrone
Madhuranthakan. That made others squirm in embarrassment. The
Pazhuvettaraiyar could not bear the insults hurled at him. At one point he even
advised Sambuvaraiyar that they should openly tell the Crown Prince about the
Chieftains’ low opinion about him. Sambuvaraiyar was against it.

“Please be patient. He is our guest now. And he is a ruffian. What if our words
misfire and we get caught in complications? Let’s bide our time.”

Of course Sambuvaraiyar also wanted to tell the Crown Prince that the
Chieftains were not so enthusiastic in his becoming a King.

But he was not in a hurry. He was waiting for the right moment.

The Crown Prince himself gifted the right moment to the two old men. One day
while in the presence of all the guests he blurted out:

“I want to seek the advice of my Pazhuvur Pattan (Grandfather) and Kadambur

Maman (Uncle). That is the reason I came to Kadambur. Three years ago my
father made me the Crown Prince. You all supported his decision. But later, it
seems, that the Emperor has changed his mind. I hear that he wants to crown
Madhuranthakan. He has been inviting me to come to Thanjavur again and
again.

On my part I have been avoiding meeting the Emperor. Why should I go? Why
should I meet him and openly disobey him? Don’t you think it is prudent to
avoid meeting him? My dear Pazhuvur Patta, and you, Kadambur Mama you are
great men of age and wisdom. You know the ways of the world. You know what
is fair and what is not. You tell me, is it fair on the part of my father to ask me to
give up the Crown? And that too after so many years? And is it a crime to turn
down such an unfair request?”

Everyone was shocked to hear the exceedingly firm words of the Crown Prince.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar cleared his throat and bought some time by throwing
another question at the Prince.

“My Lord, I am sure you would have discussed this with your grandfather. What
is Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman’s take on this issue?”

“Aha! You all know the old lion! Do you think he will let his grandson give up
his throne to somebody else? He’d rather kill me and my mother, his own
daughter. Do you know that he has started gathering an army already? He says
that he will wage a war to protect his grandson’s right to the throne. But I am not
going to listen to him. I’ll rather go by your advice.”

Karikalan talked like a very soft and sensitive person now.

Pazhuvettaraiyar was disappointed.

“We are not like Malaiyaman. We will never instigate the son to rise against his
own father. We are bound by honour and duty to obey the command of the
Emperor, whatever it may be. But as seniors who have been serving the country
for many generations we have the right to tell what is right in this case. We can’t
say that the Emperor’s request is completely baseless. We cannot deny
Madhuranthakan’s right to the Chozha Throne.

“Since you have asked very specifically we don’t want to hide anything. We’ll
tell you what we think. We’ll leave the final decision to you.

We think that letting this debate continue any further will harm the interests of
the country. It is better that we arrive at some sort of consensus to avoid
conflicts. In the olden days the Chozha Kingdom was small and was confined
between the two Vellaru Rivers. Today it is vast and is spread all over from
Kanyakumari to the banks of River Krishna. Even if we divide the Kingdom into
two, each half will be a large Kingdom in its own merit. That way it will be fair
to give the area south of River Coleroon to Madhuranthakan and the area north
of Coleroon to you, my Lord. This is our compromise formula. If you agree to
this arrangement we will go ahead with partition. It will be my personal
responsibility to convince the Emperor in this regard.”

Adithya Karikalan’s noisy laugh caused waves of fury to rise in
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s stomach.

“Patta, You want to divide the Chozha Kingdom into two so that the
Pazhuvettaraiyars can rule the Southern Part and the Sambuvaraiyars, the
Northern one. It is a good compromise formula. After all your families have
been serving the Kingdom since the time of my great grandfather. And this is a
fair reward for your services.

“But I do not want to divide the Kingdom. Not at all. Dividing the Kingdom and
sharing it between two claimants is like sharing one’s wife with others. You old
men may not mind that kind of a sharing arrangement. But I am against it.”

Sparks flew in Pazhuvettaraiyar’s eyes. He stood up. He was ready to unsheathe
his sword.

“Patta, why do you want to quit now? Listen to me. Let me tell you my plan. I
hate dividing this great Kingdom. My ancestors and yours struggled for more
than five generations, sacrificed the lives of so many warriors, to consolidate the
Kingdom and grow it to this size. It is a grave sin to make it small once again by
dividing it within the family. Our ancestors like Rajadithya, who are living in
heaven, will curse our families. So drop the idea.

I am ready to give up the entire Kingdom in favour of Madhuranthakan. In a way
it is fair. After all who is Madhuranthakan? He is my grandfather’s brother’s son.
In fact he should have been crowned the King in the place of my father. But
thanks to Emperor Paranthaka, my father ascended the throne. That’s a mistake
and let the same mistake not happen again.

Though I have every right to claim the throne under the “son after his father”
rule, I’ll give up my claim in favour of Madhuranthakan. I’ll do that on one
condition. I want an army of three hundred thousand men to invade north. I want
you to give me the arms, weapons and other necessary things for the army. I also

want you to give food for one year for the army. I also want three hundred ships
that are seaworthy. I’ll create a Navy and make Parthibendran the Chief of Navy.
I’ll make him sail along the coast while I’ll be invading the territories with the
army by land. Parthibendran and I will meet at the estuary of Ganges River.
Then we will join forces and go further north. One of my forbears, my
namesake, Karikal Valavan, went up the Himalayas and hoisted the Tiger Flag in
the one of the peaks the mountain range. The poets of our country eulogize him
for this achievement. What my ancestor did, I’ll do again. With the help of my
sword, with the help of my soldiers I’ll become the Emperor of the territory
north of River Krishna.

And if I die in war I’ll ascend that heaven reserved for the bravest of brave for I
would have died in the cause of establishing my Kingdom.

Pazhuvur Patta! Kadambur Mama! What do you say? Are you ready to accept
my condition?”

Karikalan paused after delivering a majestic speech.

The two old men were shocked. Pazhuvettaraiyar’s voice was shaken.

“My Lord, who are we to accept your condition? What right do we have? The
Emperor alone has to decide. “

Karikalan was furious. He thundered to the old man:

“Patta, how long are you going to deceive us in the name of the Emperor? You
can deceive anyone; but not me. You have imprisoned my father in his own
palace. You have made him a puppet who dances to your tune. Do you think I
don’t know that? Can anybody see my father without the permission of your
brother Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar? My father issued orders to arrest my brother in
Lanka. Was it because he liked to do that? No, you forced him. Do you think any
father will have the heart to have his darling son arrested? Do you think any
father will order the arrest his own son, who is of one of the greatest warriors of
our times and the darling of the people? The people of Chozha Kingdom are
outraged because you arrested the Prince, tortured and killed him by drowning.
People are furious over you, Patta.”

“Prince, who told you that? Who levelled that grossly baseless charge against
me? Tell me, Prince. I’ll slit open their mouths and cut their tongues. And then
slaughter them.”

“If it is just one person you can do whatever you want. Thousands, why, lakhs
and lakhs of people are accusing you. And if you want to punish them all the
Chozha Kingdom will become a large cremation ground. And if it happened it
will be ideal for Madhuranthakan to rule over the country. For he is Lord Shiva’s
devotee. And we know that the Lord loves to dance in cemeteries and cremation
grounds. But, Patta, I don’t believe their words. People are fools. If one man says
something everybody else will repeat it without reflecting on it. You and your
ancestors have been helping the Chozha clan for generations. I am sure you
would not have done such a heinous act. If Arulmozhi had drowned in the sea it
should be because of his destiny. Perhaps he did so to mock at the astrologers
and palmists who have been repeating like a parrot that he was born to rule over
the three worlds.

“You may be the greatest of warriors. Even then you cannot create a storm in the
middle of the sea or make lightning strike the sails of his boat. That could be
handiwork of the sorcerers of Pandya Kingdom. But you are no way responsible
for that calamity. Nor are you responsible for Arulmozhi’s death.

But don’t ever say “I’ll have to consult the Emperor” again. Then you will even
say, “I’ll have to consult the Chief Minister.” The Emperor and Chief Minister
simply bear their respective titles. They cannot do anything without consulting
you.

Oh yes, you can say, “I’ll consult your grandmother, Nandini Devi.” That will be
reasonable.”

Kandhanmaran intervened.

“My Lord, you are. ... He is our guest now.... “He was shaken. He spoke out
aloud. But the words were not coherent.

Karikalan spat fire.

“Kandhanmaran, is this your house? I forgot. I even forgot the fact that you are a
descendant of the great warrior, Ori of Kollimalai. In your house and that too in
your presence, I need to have some kind of fear and restraint. Right?

But tell me, what did I say wrong? What did I do to your guests? Why are you
trembling now? Perhaps you are afflicted with that viral fever which is rampant
in Srilanka. But you have never been to Lanka. How did you get that?”

Vandhiya Thevan stood up.

“My Lord, Kandhanmaran does not have any fever. He is upset because you
called the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur, grandmother.”

Kandhanmaran glared at Vandhiya Thevan with hostile fury in his eyes. He tried
to unsheathe his sword. Parthibendran held his hand and made him sit down. He
whispered something in his ears.

Kandhanmaran was pacified. But he was still trembling. Karikalan laughed at
him before turning to Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“Patta, young men will be like that. At times they will be out of our control.
Ignore them. In a way you are my grandfather. Then will not the Junior Queen
be my grandmother? I am sure you won’t mind my calling her grandmother. I am
sure she won’t mind it. I am surprised why these boys are upset about it? Ok, let
it go. I have digressed from the main issue.

I request you not to shift the burden to my father, the Emperor. If you agree he
too will agree to my plan. After all the country’s treasury is under your control.
And if I announce that I am going to invade north, not just three hundred
thousand, but three million soldiers will volunteer to join my army. Getting me
three hundred ships is not a big deal for you. But first you should agree to my
plan. And make Madhuranthakan agree. That is all. What do you say?”

Pazhuvettaraiyar was shaken. He was groping for words. At last he cleared his
throat and spoke in a trembling voice.

“My Lord, I might agree to your strange request. But don’t you think that
Madhuranthakan also should agree? Again, how can you go on your great
expedition without taking leave of the Emperor? So I suggest that we all go to
Thanjavur.”

“I can’t do that, Patta. What if my father orders me to do something else? Then I
can’t go against him. My mother, Malaiyaman’s daughter and my sister,
Kunthavai may not like my decision of abdicating the throne and going on an
expedition. It’ll be very difficult for me to go against their wishes. Patta, this
matter has to be decided here in this Kadambur Palace.

“I suggest that you go to Thanjavur and bring Madhuranthakan here. Let me
explain my stand and help him come to a decision. We will then inform my
father. You start making arrangements for my expedition. Once the army, the
ships and everything is ready I’ll come to Thanjavur to take leave of my parents.
Alternatively, let Madhuranthakan be crowned now itself. And then let my
parents come to Kancheepuram. I’ll make them stay in the golden palace built by
me. I’ll stay with them for a few days before leaving north.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar looked at Sambuvaraiyar who was looking at the ceiling.
Pazhuvettaraiyar knew that he would not get any help from his host. He spoke in
a very soft voice:

“How can I go against your orders, my Lord?”

“Don’t say ‘orders’ Patta. You have been serving the nation for decades. Your
hair has gone grey in service to the country. How can a small boy like me order
you around? Tell me you’ll grant my prayer, Patta.”

“Okay, let it be so.” Pazhuvettaraiyar cleared his throat.

“Thank you very much, Patta. Please make arrangements for your journey. Fast!
Let Madhuranthakan come on an elephant. Or he can ride on a golden chariot.
Let him not come in the closed palanquin of the Junior Queen.”

Karikalan laughed.

He then turned to Kandhanmaran and others.

“Kandhanmaran, you are very fortunate. More guests are coming here.
Madhuranthakan who is going to succeed Sundara Chozhan as the Emperor of
Chozha Kingdom is going to be your guest. He may even bring with him his
wife, the would-be Queen of the Nation, the daughter of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.
Kadambur Palace will wear a festive look. Let Pazhuvettaraiyar leave for
Thanjavur. Come, let us go for hunting. Once I was an expert archer. People used
to say, “After the legendary Arjuna the next best is our Adithya Karikalan.” But I
have not touched my bow for the last three years. I will have to train myself
again. I will need a lot of practice. Parthibendra, Vandhiya Theva! Come let’s go.
Let’s start now. Where shall we go? To Kollimalai Forest?”

Sambuvarayar who never took part in the conversation so far ventured to speak.

“My Lord, Kollimalai forest is far away. You need not go that far. There is a
dense forest in the Western banks of Veeranarayana Lake. It is known as
“Dhandakaranyam”. There are a lot of wild animals in that forest. The animals
we hunted in that forest are there in our Hunters’ Hall. If you leave early in the
morning you can come home by night.”

“As you please, Sir. As long as I am your guest in this palace your word is the
lay. Can we take your daughter Manimekalai with us? She is a good
conversationalist and is adept in creating a joyful atmosphere.”

“I don’t have any objection, my Lord. Let’s find out if Manimekalai is
interested.”

Kandhanmaran intervened.

“Why do we need women when we go on hunting? That will be a headache for
us. We’ll spend most of the time worried about the safety of the women. We
can’t focus on hunting. If we take Manimekalai out for hunting then the Junior
Queen of Pazhuvur will be left alone without any company.”

“Yes, yes. Kandhanmaran is always worried about Pazhuvur Patti. Coming to
think of it there is another problem in taking Manimekalai for hunting. The way
she jumps and runs, people may mistake her for a deer and shoot arrows. Let the
women stay in the Palace. We shall go for hunting. We need to leave very early
in the morning. I presume we have that Kuravaikoothu entertainment in the
evening. Let us see that it ends early so that we can retire early. Only then will be
able to get up early in the morning. Send word to the hunters right now.
Vandhiya Theva, come let’s go to our room.”

The Crown Prince held Vandhiya Thevan’s hand and walked out of the hall.
Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran were burning in jealousy.

Sambuvaraiyar went away to issue orders to the hunters. The Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar went in search of Nandini.

Chapter 38 - Nandini Refused

Pazhuvettaraiyar was excited over the latest developments. He wanted to share
his excitement with Nandini. He almost ran towards Nandini’s chambers.

He had come to Kadambur with a mission. Till that point of time his mission
was a failure. He had thought naively that if only he could manage to bring
Adithya Karikalan, who was after all a small boy, to Kadambur he could make
him dance to his tunes - either by instilling fear or by implanting greed. He
believed that the Crown Prince was bound to act as dictated by him and
Sambuvaraiyar.

He knew the dangers of making Madhuranthakan the king of the whole Chozha
Kingdom. The move will be vehemently opposed by Malaiyaman from the
North and the Kodumbalur Chieftain from the South. And if a great warrior like
Karikalan joined hands, the result would be a disastrous civil war. No one could
predict the outcome of that war. A majority of people would naturally support
the sons of the reigning Emperor. Even Madhuranthakan’s own mother, the
Queen Mother Sembian Madevi, would work against her son.

It was not possible to take part in the war just with the support of Kalamukas.
There was likely to be a large scale civil mutiny in the Pandya territory, in the
Chera territory and in the provinces north of Paalaru River. So the best way out
was to make Madhuranthakan the king of one half of the Kingdom, especially
the southern half with Thanjavur as its capital. And later the Pazhuvettaraiyars
would gather enough strength and annex the remaining portion of the Kingdom.
Once Madhuranthakan was crowned the King it would be easy to destroy the
powers of Kodumbalur Chieftain later. Then one could turn north and even crush
the forces of Malaiyaman. Karikalan was an over-sensitive, short-tempered,
ruffian. Given his nature he was likely to get himself involved in some pointless

affair and might even lose his life. If that happened all the problems of
Pazhuvettaraiyar would be solved. It would be a matter of mere political
procedure to annex the headless state.

All these points emerged in the discussion Pazhuvettaraiyar had with his young
wife Nandini. It was Nandini who planted the idea of partition in his mind and
urged him to present the compromise formula. Pazhuvettaraiyar was convinced
about her plan and only then did he decide to go to Kadambur. And requested the
Crown Prince to come.

But all his hopes were belied. Nothing happened as planned. He thought that
Karikalan would show reverence to the old men and that he and Sambuvaraiyar
would use that as an advantage to shove their partition plan down his throat. But
that never happened. Karikalan virtually humiliated the two grand old men of the
Chozha Kingdom. He barked orders to them. He advised them on many issues.
He asserted himself and always gained an upper hand in any discussion they had
with him. He never listened to them.

Pazhuvettaraiyar could not bear his satirical remarks, his double-meaning words
and the insults directly hurled at him. Karikalan insisted on calling him an old
man; in fact he addressed him only as Patta, grandfather. Nandini who was
younger than Karikalan was referred to as Paati, the grandmother. Technically no
one could find fault with the Prince. That was a family tradition. But to
Pazhuvettaraiyar even the way Karikalan addressed him and his young wife
appeared as poisoned arrows directed towards his chest.

As if to add fuel to fire even Sambuvaraiyar’s behaviour was not up to the mark.
Instead of standing up for Pazhuvettaraiyar and insisting on Karikalan to behave
himself, Sambuvaraiyar was a silent spectator most of the time. He spoke
hesitantly and it was mostly to adhere to the protocol as a host. Perhaps he was a
little overcautious to avoid any untoward event when the Crown Prince was a
guest in his Palace.

Pazhuvettaraiyar hated Sambuvaraiyar’s diplomatic behaviour.

But Adithya Karikalan’s compromise formula changed everything.
Pazhuvettaraiyar regained the lost enthusiasm.

At the same time he did not know to what extent he can rely on Karikalan’s
words. It was difficult whether the Crown Prince was sincere. Did the Prince
speak what was in his heart? Or did he hide his real feelings and uttered
something to please him? He could never know. Perhaps the Crown Prince
might have said all those things to test waters. Or perhaps the Prince had laid a
bait to bring Madhuranthakan to Kadambur. Who knows, Madhuranthakan
might even be trapped and killed here in Kadambur. The Crown Prince might
have even asked his grandfather Malaiyaman to invade Kadambur and hold the
Palace under siege after Madhuranthakan came.

Pazhuvettaraiyar did not want to take that kind of a risk. Bringing
Madhuranthakan here would be worse than putting all his eggs in one basket.
The best way out was to go to Thanjavur and consult his brother the Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. The Junior was an excellent strategist. And the Junior can be
asked to bring a huge army which should be waiting at the banks of Coleroon for
any contingency. But irrespective of the decision he took there was no point in
letting Nandini stay in that Palace. She would be insulted by these fools. Now
there was an opportunity to take her back and leave her in Thanjavur. Why
should he miss this god-given chance?

Pazhuvettaraiyar was smiling when reached the chambers of Nandini. When he
was near the door he could hear somebody laughing inside his wife’s room. For
no reason the sound of laughing irritated him. Nandini never laughed like that
when she was in Thanjavur. What made her so happy now? Who was laughing
with her?

The moment he entered the room he knew that Manimekalai, daughter of
Sambuvaraiyar, was laughing along with his wife. He was a little pacified. When
Manimekalai saw him she covered her mouth with her hands struggling hard to
hide her laugh. But she burst out laughing once again. While still laughing she
ran out of the room.

Nandini was also laughing. But she stopped abruptly on seeing her husband. She
regained her usual majestic poise.

“Welcome, dear. Has the discussion ended? So soon?”

Pazhuvettaraiyar ignored her question.

“Nandini, why did that silly girl laugh like that? Why is she running away
laughing?”

“She overheard part of the conversation that happened in the Court Hall. Her
room is adjacent to the Hall and the walls are not perfectly sound proof. She
heard that part of the discussion where the Crown Prince talked about his grand
fathers and grand mothers. Manimekalai could not help laughing.”

“But why the hell are you laughing with her?”

“Yes. I did. I had to. I was waiting for her to go so that I can cry in silence. And
you came.”

Nandini could muster tears at her will. She wiped her tears.

“Oh My God! I was a fool to have brought you here to be in the midst of these
idiots. Please bear with these people for just one more night. We shall leave for
Thanjavur first thing in the morning.”

“Why? So early? Is our work over here in Kadambur?”

Pazhuvettaraiyar faithfully relayed what happened in the Court Hall.

Nandini’s voice was very calm.

“My Lord, you go to Thanjavur. I won’t come with you. I won’t leave this place
before teaching that arrogant Karikalan a lesson he would never forget in his life.
Either he should prostrate before you begging your forgiveness for what he
spoke today or he should fall a prey to your sword.”

“What are you talking, Nandini? From when did you become so cruel?”

“Somebody has insulted my dear husband. I want to take revenge. Is this your
definition of cruelty, my Lord?”

“No, Nandini. Please listen. Our Pazhuvur clan has been associated with the

Chozha clan for the past six generations. Simply because a flippant youth forgot
history and spoke whimsically, should I take arms against the great Chozha clan?
How can I kill the Emperor’s son? How can I kill the Crown Prince with my
own hands?”

Pazhuvettaraiyar was trembling. He could not bear the thought of going against
the Emperor and the Chozha dynasty.

There was another subtle reason for his outburst. When he heard the harsh words
of Karikalan his hand had instinctively reached for his sword. But he had
controlled himself then. Yes, a few minutes before he wanted to kill the Crown
Prince. But when Nandini told him what was in his mind he became nervous.

“I understand, my Lord. You were associated with the Chozha clan for the past
six generations. Yes, you can’t take the sword against the Crown Prince. But I
don’t have any such restriction. I don’t owe any duty to the Chozha clan. If that
arrogant Karikalan does not touch your feet I’ll kill him with my own hands.”

Nandini’s eyes had gone red. Her eye-brows were arched in anger. Her face had
changed. Pazhuvettaraiyar had never seen so much rage on that beautiful face.

Chapter 39 - Calamity Ahead

Pazhuvettaraiyar smiled. He wanted to tease his young wife and so the smile was
very mild. At least that was what he thought. But the sound of his smile caused
the things in that room to tremble. His heart was about to burst in pride when he
heard that his young wife was ready to wield the sword against anyone who
insulted him. He had a strange sense of euphoria. He was happy to know that
Nandini was very keen in protecting his honour. He wanted her to speak in the
same strain for some more time. At the same time he wanted to pretend that he
did not like that kind of talk.

“Why did you laugh, dear? You don’t believe me?”

“No, Nandini. I fully believe you. I was wondering how you are going to wield a
heavy sword with your hand which is as soft as a flower. And what is the need
when I am alive and kicking with my two long arms ... “

“I know the power and glory of your arms, dear. Your long arms are like the
trunk of an elephant. They are as strong as the Vajrayutha, the formidable
weapon wielded by the chief of gods, the Devendra. Your arms have had the
honour of killing thousands of enemies in the battle-field. It was your arms that
crowned the Emperor of Chozha Kingdom. And it was your arms that saved
him from any danger. But who thinks of all those things? Youngsters who are
still green behind their ears have started calling you ‘old man’. And you, my
dear, behave like a snake which is caught in a spell. You silently bear all the
insults because of your devotion to the rulers of the Chozha clan. I know, dear,
my hands are very soft. They are fit for wearing bangles. But I held your strong
hands in the presence of the holy fire while marrying you. That has given some
power to my hands. If there be a need to save my chastity or your honour my
arms would get the power to wield the heaviest of the swords. Look here!”

Nandini bent down and pulled a box from beneath the cot. She opened the box
and took out the dresses. She then took out a long, shining sword from the box
and lifted it above her head with nonchalant grace.

Pazhuvettaraiyar was shocked.

“How long was this sword inside this box? I thought the box had nothing but
your dresses.”

Nandini kept the sword inside the box.

“Yes, I keep my dresses and jewels inside this box. Of all the ornaments I have
this sword is the most precious. And this sword has the power to guard the most
precious ornament of a woman - I mean my chastity and it can save my
husband’s honour as well.”

“But I don’t think you will have a chance to use this sword; at least as long as I
am alive.”

“That is why I never take this sword out of this box. You are capable of
protecting the borders of this vast kingdom which extend from Sri Lanka to
Vengi country. Can’t you protect yourself? You can guard an ordinary girl like
me with your strength, dear. But you are always involved in very important
affairs. You can’t be thinking about my safety all the time. When you are away
on duty I should have some means to guard myself. That’s why I keep this sword
along with my dresses and jewels.”

“What is the need, my dear? Of course you can keep the sword. But I won’t be
away from you in the future.”

“That’s my wish too, dear. But just for once you may have to leave me here and
go to Thanjavur to fetch Madhuranthakan.”

“Why? Why are you adamant? Why should I go alone?” Pazhuvettaraiyar arched
his brows and raised his voice.

Nandini was unfazed.

“There are two reasons, my Lord. If you take me with you those idiots would
make fun of both of us. ‘The old man doesn’t believe his young wife.’ They will
talk behind our backs. My blood boils when I hear such comments. But there is
another important reason, my Lord. You have been telling all along that
Sambuvaraiyar is your best friend. But ever since the Crown Prince came here I
see a change in his behaviour. Did you notice?”

“Yes, dear. I too have been watching. I wonder what made him change.”

“You are still innocent, dear. That’s why you are surprised by his change. But I
am not. Ambition is the basic trait of every man. And that is the reason for the
change you find in him. It was rumoured till now that the Crown Prince never
looks at women and has no idea of marrying anybody. But the Crown Prince’s
behaviour in this Palace belies those rumours. He visits the ladies’ chambers
quite often. He talks with the women. He flirts with them. Do you know the

reason? He is attracted to Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter, Manimekalai. Didn’t he
ask, “Can we take Manimekalai with us for hunting?” Sambuvaraiyar has also
noticed this change. A new desire has entered his mind. He has forgotten all our
old plans. He has started dreaming of seeing his only daughter as the Empress of
Chozha Kingdom.”

“You are right, Nandini. I never thought Sambuvaraiyar will stoop to that level.
Two months ago we all joined hands to take a vow to make Madhuranthakan the
next Chozha Emperor. But this man, blinded by ambition, has gone back on his
word. He is not fit to be a human being.”

“That is the precise reason I do not want to come with you. I’ll be watching the
actions of these people during your absence. And if they plan something against
your interests I’ll give my life and soul to thwart their plans.”

“But Nandini, why should you get involved in all these dirty affairs?”

“Am I not your life-partner, dear? Whatever affairs you are involved I will also
be involved. What for did you marry me, dear?”

“But Nandini I don’t want to leave you in the midst of fools and crooks. I don’t
have the mind to leave you here, my dearest.”

“I am not alone, dear. I have company. I have good support. Manimekalai is
there for me. She will even die for me.”

“That’s true. I also noticed. Your beauty has enslaved her. But how long will that
last? If Adithya Karikalan becomes the King and promises to make her his
Empress?”

“You need not have any doubt on that front, dear. Manimekalai will refuse such
request even if it comes from the chief of gods, if I do not approve of the match.
If I give this sword to her and ask her to stab Karikalan she will do it for me. You
used to talk about my seductive power. Manimekalai is now completely under its
influence. If you want I can demonstrate my power to you right now.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s body trembled in fear. With his lips quivering he spoke in a
choked voice.

“Devi, I know your powers. But don’t test them on Karikalan. He is after all a
kid. Let us not take his words to heart. If he wants to marry Manimekalai let us
not stand against it.”

“Yes, my Lord. Let us not oppose the marriage. But we should not forget that
there is something called destiny. Who can oppose Destiny, tell me.
Manimekalai adores me. And I love her. I love her like my own sister. How can I
let her marry a person who is going to face an untimely death?”

Nandini had a distant stare on her eyes.

Pazhuvettaraiyar was more nervous now.

“Oh My God! What are you saying, Nandini? I was once the head of Velakkara
Army, the King’s bodyguards. I have sworn to give my life in order to protect
the lives of the Emperor and his family.”

“I never said that you should act against your promise.”

“But, dear, if Karikalan is hurt because of you, the blame will fall on me. The
whole world will accuse me” “Unable to bear a kid teasing him the old man has
committed this heinous crime.” And our family will lose the name and honour
that has been earned during the last six generations.”

“Then it is all the more important that you should leave this place immediately.”

“What makes you say that?”

“I have been wanting to share that with you for quite some time. Now the time
has come. You know that the Goddess Durga Parameswari has given me some
unusual powers. It was through those powers I learnt that Emperor Sundara
Chozhan is guilty of killing a woman in his younger days. I proved that to you as
well.

“In the same way I now see the end of Adithya Karikalan with those divine
powers. No, it is not going to happen because of you. Or me. But I am sure that
the Goddess of Death is nearing him. He might die while he goes for hunting. Or
might die while sleeping in this Palace. His death can be caused by wild animals
like a tiger or a bear. Or he may die in the hands of one of his close friends,
whose arrow might miss the target and hit him. Or he may die being killed by a
dagger in the soft hands of a woman. But my dear, I promise you, his death will

not be caused by the hands of a woman who has married you in the presence of
the holy fire. No, I assure you I won’t kill him.

“I was an orphan on the street. You married me and made me the Queen of
Pazhuvur. And it will be my first duty to make sure that you are not blamed in
this affair. And that is the reason I insist that you should leave the place right
now. If something happens to the Prince when you are here then the whole
country will say that you killed him. Didn’t they blame you for
Arulmozhivarman’s death on the high seas? In the same way you will be blamed
even Karikalan’s death is nothing but an accident. But take it from me you
cannot prevent his death even with your strong arms.

“So you should leave this place. Right now. Yes, you can take me with you. But
that will make people suspicious. They will say, ‘Pazhuvettaraiyar knew this was
going to happen. So ran away from the scene along with his wife.’ You should
go alone. I will be here to save your name and honour, dear. Do you trust me, my
Lord?”

Nandini directed her big, black eyes at Pazhuvettaraiyar’s chest. It appeared as if
she was trying to pierce his chest with that pointed glace. Poor soul!
Pazhuvettaraiyar was visibly shaken by the arrows which came from her mouth
as pointed words. And now he could not stand the attack of arrows coming from
her beautiful eyes. He surrendered to her charms.

Chapter 40 - Water Sports

Six hundred years before the time of this story there were seven famous
Chieftains in Tamilnadu apart from the three great Tamil Kings - Cheras,
Chozhas and Pandyas.

The seven chieftains were also known as great philanthropists. It is customary to
refer to them as “The Seven Great Philanthropists.” One of the seven was Ori,
who ruled over the Kolli Hills. Ori was an acclaimed master in archery. He was
compared to Lord Rama in archery. Once Rama shot an arrow to prove a point,
or rather to prove his prowess to King Sugriva who was about to forge alliance
with him. The arrow pierced seven trees which were not in a straight line.
Similarly there was a legend that the arrow shot by the great Ori first pierced the
body of a tiger, a deer, a boar and finally a rabbit. The great poets of Tamilnadu
have glorified Ori’s archery in their songs. And because of this he was called as
the “One Who is Adept In Wielding A Bow” or ‘Val-vil Ori’

Once one of the three Kings of Tamilnadu, the Chera King was furious over Ori.
The Chera King wanted to finish off Ori; but he could not do it alone. He sought
the assistance of Malaiyaman Thirumudikkari. Kari was no less than Ori. And
Kari had an added advantage. He had a much stronger army than Ori.
Malaiyaman invaded the Kolli Hills, killed Ori and destroyed the fort built by
him on the hills.

Athikaman Nedumananchi was a Chieftain, like Ori. He was ruling over a small
territory which was adjacent to Ori’s called, Thahadoor. Ori was his best friend.
And Nedumananchi wanted to avenge his friend’s death. He knew very well that
he could not invade Malaiyaman Kari without help from other chieftains.

He sought the help of the Chozha King at that time, one who went by the name
Killivalavan. Killi Valavan was already displeased with Malaiyaman because of
his growing strength and his allegiance to the Chera King. Killivalavan was,
therefore, only too eager to help the campaign launched by Athikaman
Nedumananchi. They joined hands to attack Malaiyaman. Malaiyaman could not
withstand the onslaught and he died on the battlefield. His two sons were held
captive by the soldiers of the Chozha Army.

Killivalavan and Athikaman wanted to destroy the entire clan of Malaiyaman.
The children were buried in sand up to their neck. The King’s elephants were
order to trample them. A poet who had once sung the praises of Malaiyaman and
had gained personally by his philanthropy reached the place at the nick of time.
He made a passionate plea to the Chozha Emperor on behalf of the innocent
children.

“Your Majesty, please see the smile on the faces of these innocent children. They
are too young to know about their destiny. Blissfully unaware of the approaching
death they are laughing at the elephant’s trunk, which is dangling from its neck.
They perhaps think that this is a different kind of circus. Are you going to kill
these innocent children, Your Majesty? Is it fair to kill the children for the faults
of their father?”

The Chozha King changed his mind. He rescinded his orders. He ordered that
the children be retrieved. When the children came of age he made the eldest son
the ruler of Thirukkovalur.

From that time onwards the clan of Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman had been faithful
friends of the Chozha clan. It was friendship rooted in gratitude. The relationship
extended till the time of Sundara Chozhan, for the Emperor had married,
Vanamaadevi, who was the daughter of Malayaman.

Meanwhile the clans of Ori and Athikaman lost their powers and vanished from
history. The Kadambur Sambuvaraiyars claimed that they were descendants of
Ori and Athikaman. They never forgot the enmity of Oris with the Malaiyamans.
In these circumstances it was quite natural that the Sambuvaraiyar did not want
the grandson of a Malaiyaman to become a Chozha Emperor.

Adithya Karikalan’s arrogance, his attitude of treating the Chieftains like dirt
fuelled the hatred of Sambuvaraiyar. That made him actively participate in the
conspiracy to place Kandaraathithar’s son, Madhuranthakan, on the Thanjavur
throne.

But ever since Karikalan came to Kadambur, Sambuvaraiyar’s mind was going
through a gradual change. It was his darling daughter Manimekalai, who brought
this change in her father. There were unmistakable signs that Manimekalai had
stolen the heart of the Crown Prince.

It was rumoured that Karikalan would never look at women and that he had
vowed to remain unmarried throughout his life. But Karikalan spent most of his
time in the ladies’ chambers in the Kadambur Palace. He was talking in a
flirtatious tone to the women of the Royal Household. In particular he was
praising Manimekalai’s natural gift of enthusiasm. Manimekalai too appeared to
be deliriously happy since the arrival of the Crown Prince. Sambuvaraiyar
naively thought that his daughter too had fallen for the Prince’s charm. He was
pleased to see his daughter and the Crown Prince being happy in each other’s
company. If his daughter married Karikalan she would become the Empress of
the vast Chozha Kingdom.

And the child born to her would succeed Karikalan to the Chozha throne.
Whatever honour and glory that Malaiyaman was enjoying today would be his in
the next generation.

Why should I interfere with the Lady Luck who is eager to visit my Palace? Why
should I stand in the way of my daughter’s glory?

It was true that Sambuvaraiyar wanted to give his daughter’s hand to
Madhuranthakan the heir apparent to the Chozha throne. But Madhuranthakan
already had two wives. And one of his wives was the daughter of the Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. He also had a son through her. So if Madhuranthakan was
crowned the King, Pazhuvettaraiyar’s clan would come in the direct line of
succession. Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter Manimekalai would be one of the
thousands of maids in Thanjavur Palace.

But if Manimekalai married Adithya Karikalan she would be the Empress of the
Chozha Kingdom. Her son would be crowned the King after Karikalan. Again it
was next to impossible to make Madhuranthakan the King. People were against
him. And they would have to wage a war against Malaiyaman and Kodumbalur
Chieftain to achieve the near impossible feat of making Madhuranthakan the
Emperor.

Even Madhuranthakan’s mother would oppose the move. Why should we get
into that kind of a trouble where there was no gain for him or his family?

On the other hand Adithya Karikalan’s coronation was a decided issue. It was
not likely to be opposed. The only possible resistance would be the adamant
attitude of Pazhuvettaraiyars. Of the two brothers, the elder one, at his age, was a
slave to his young wife’s beauty. How long would he live, nobody knew. Why
should Sambuvaraiyar undertake a risky venture relying only on the support of
that old man? Yes, it was true that Sambuvaraiyar had pledged his support to
Madhuranthakan. So what? Let me explore the ways of accomplishing my desire
without violating the pledge.

Madhuranthakan was a gullible person. It was easy even to make him refuse the
throne. He did not even go to that extent. Enough if Madhuranthakan said that
without his mother’s blessings he would not accept the Crown.

Sambuvaraiyar’s mind had started thinking in these lines. That made him
enthusiastically support the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s decision of going to Thanjavur to
bring Madhuranthakan. Pazhuvettaraiyar’s absence would give Sambuvaraiyar
opportunities for a “heart to heart” talk with Adithya Karikalan. Once he knew
what was in the Crown Prince’s mind then he could devise his strategy
accordingly. He hastened Pazhuvettaraiyar’s trip to Thanjavur and personally
arranged a retinue to go with him.

Pazhuvettaraiyar left for his long journey. Karikalan and his friends went for
hunting. Sambuvaraiyar was even ready to send his daughter, Manimekalai, and
her friends along with the hunting expedition. But Kandhanmaran who had been
seeing things from a different perspective strongly objected to it. Kandhanmaran
was shrewd enough to know that the attention Karikalan paid to Manimekalai
was only on account of Nandini. That made him hate the Crown Prince even
more. He could not explain the subtle relationship to his father.

Hence he opted for the usual arguments - “What’s the use of girls while we are
going on a hunting expedition? If they came with us, we will be spending most
of our time worrying about their safety. Again, this is the Tamil month of
Aippasi (October - November) Rains may come at any moment. . There might
be floods. The ladies will be stranded.”

Sambuvaraiyar abandoned the idea of sending his daughter. Karikalan left for
hunting along with his friends Parthibendran, Vandhiya Thevan, Kandhanmaran
and a group of hunters.

Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace now wore a deserted look. But for Sambuvarayar, there
were no men in the palace.

Nandini started to make her move. She spoke to Manimekalai.

“Men were a nuisance to us when they were here. But if all of them are away
then we start missing them. There is nothing to make fun of. It’s boring.”

“Yes, Akka. We too could have gone with them. I want to see hunting. I used to
go with my father and my brother. But today Kandhanmaran was quite adamant
in stopping us. I don’t know why. Perhaps he knows that you hate hunting and
that was the reason for his ban.”

“Yes, Manimekalai. I don’t like hunting. I am allergic to blood. But that was not
the reason for Kandhanmaran’s ban. He was particular in keeping you away
from one of the guests. That was why he did not want us to come.”

Dimples appeared on Manimekalai’s cheeks. After some time she replied.

“Let the men go to hell, Akka! Who cares! Who needs their company, anyway?
But Akka, I have a plan. Why don’t we go to the Mandapam in the middle of the
lake to have a swim?”

Nandini agreed. Manimekalai made the arrangements.

On the eastern side of the gigantic Veeranarayana Lake there was a huge bank
and seventy four canals that carry water from the lake to agricultural lands.
There was no such bank on the Western Side. On the western side the water level
was low and near the bank it was almost at the ground level. Further west were
the dense forests.

Near the western bank, where the water level was low, there were some small
islets here and there. These islets were thick in vegetation. In one of these islets
on the western side there were steps and a Mandapam. The women of the
Kadambur Palace used to visit this place to have a bath and entertain themselves
with water sports. To reach this place one had to go around the lake for about ten
miles. Because of the distance and because of the fact that the place was
reserved for the women of the royal household, people never came near that
place.

Nandini and Manimekalai got on a boat and rowed to this secluded place. There
were two maids who did the rowing. They had even bought vessels and
provisions for cooking. As soon as the boat reached the Mandapam the maids
got down and started cooking.

Nandini and Manimekalai sat on the steps to gossip about the members of the
Royal household. Manimekalai was intelligent, talented and quite mischievous.
She mimicked the voice of Pazhuvettaraiyar, Karikalan, Kandhanmaran,
Parthibendran and Vandhiya Thevan. Nandini could not control her laugh. But
Nandini’s mind was not there. It had drifted to a secret corner of her mind where
something crucial was cooking.

Suddenly Manimekalai stood up with a jolt.

“Akka, we have not come for hunting. But you know hunting is coming towards

us.”

She shouted while pulling out a knife from her waist.

Nandini was shocked. She looked at the spot pointed out by Manimekalai. On a
leaning branch of a large tree there was a leopard. It was looking at the two
women as if it was making its mind whether to spring on them or not.

They also heard the sound of horses galloping in water.

Chapter 41 - Karikalan’s Murderous Frenzy

Adithya Karikalan had told his hosts that it had been long since he went for
hunting and that he had almost forgotten the art of archery. But those who saw
him hunting wild beasts on the banks of Veeranarayana Lake that day did not
think so. Rabbits, deer, bears and leopards fell dead in quick succession unable
to bear the onslaught of arrows that burst out from his bow. When there were no
animals around, he aimed his arrows at the birds flying high in the sky. Eagles
and falcons fell dead screaming. Karikalan was in a state of murderous frenzy.
And the pace increased as time went on. His companions did not have much to
do.

As men and horses went through the forest making a huge noise the animals ran
for shelter. That was the only help his companions provided for his hunting. He
did not even let his companions shoot arrows at the animals that came to attack
him. Once Kandhanmaran shot an arrow at the bear that just managed to
narrowly miss Karikalan. Karikalan turned to his friend.

“Kandhanmaran, are you trying to kill the bear or me?”

Kandhanmaran was furious. He never bent his bow thereafter.

Everyone was exhausted when the sun was at its peak. All his companions
wanted to rest for a while before returning to the palace. But Karikalan was
driving his exhausted horse with the kind of fury no one could imagine.

In the morning Kandhanmaran was riding close to the Crown Prince. But once

Karikalan asked him “Are you trying to kill me?” he retreated and started riding
with Parthibendra Pallavan. He started complaining to Parthibendran about the
harsh words and the cruel behaviour of the Prince. Parthibendran did his best to
pacify him.

Vandhiya Thevan now approached Karikalan and was riding very close to him.
Vandhiya Thevan did not have bow or arrows. He was not well-versed in
archery. He had a spear. He never interfered with the Prince’s hunting. He was
extremely watchful. He was ready to use his spear should an occasion arise. And
till noon such an occasion did not present itself.

Kandhanmaran meanwhile continued his complaint.

“Is it not enough for the day? At this rate he will kill all the animals in the forest
before the end of the day. Only the large forest at Kolli Hills will give him outlet
for his frenzy. Why don’t you ask him to return? Why don’t you tell him to call it
a day?”

“Thambi, something is troubling the Prince. It is not easy to give up a large
empire. The Crown Prince perhaps is showing all his pent up fury on the hapless
animals. In a way that’s good. If there had been no hunting he would have
vented his feelings on you and me. Let’s keep quiet. Let us wait till he gets tired
and says, “Enough for the day.”

At that time the whole forest was shaken by a frightening sound. It was the
grunting sound of a wild animal. Kandhanmaran’s face went pale.

“Oh My God! It’s a wild boar. Please ask the Prince to stop.”

“It’s a boar, after all. Didn’t you see how the tigers and bears suffered from the
Prince’s arrows?”

“You don’t know about wildlife in this area. The boars in this forest can even kill
a tiger or a bear. They even attack an elephant. Horses can’t stand their ferocity
even for a few seconds. The boar’s skin is so thick that arrows and spears will
bounce off from their body. PRINCE, STOP! STOP! PLEASE STOP! DON’T
GO AFTER THAT BOAR.”

There was a whirlwind in the bushes near them. Two wild boars which
resembled elephant calves came out of the bushes. They saw the horses and the
men riding them.

“Careful. They are dangerous.” Kandhanmaran screamed.

Meanwhile the professional hunters ran up to the place and started playing their
drums furiously making awkward noises.

The boars saw the circus. Perhaps they thought of their young ones. Perhaps they
thought that their young ones might be in danger. Or they were frightened by the
sound of the drums. They started to run off in opposite directions.

Kandhanmaran saw them running.

“My Lord, let them go. Let’s not follow them. We cannot follow a boar without

the help of five or six trained hunter dogs.”

Karikalan did not pay heed. He bent his bow and shot an arrow training his eyes
on one of the boars. The arrow did not miss its mark. It stuck to the body of the
boar. Karikalan let out a victorious roar. The next second the boar shook its body.
The arrow fell down. The boar resumed its running.

Kandhanmaran laughed. And it was like insulting the Crown Prince. Karikalan
did not miss the insinuation. “Kandhanmaran! Vandhiya Thevan and I’ll go
behind that boar. We’ll kill it and bring the body back here. You and
Parthibendran go after the other boar. We shall not return to the Palace without
killing these two animals. Challenge?”

He did not wait for Kandhanmaran’s response. He kicked his horse. It started to
run. Vandhiya Thevan followed the Crown Prince.

For a while they could trace the path of the wild boar. For the beast had crushed
the bushes on the way and had left tell-tale evidence. They then encountered a
canal. The canal was built as a kind of rain-harvesting mechanism. The canal
carried the rain-water from the forest to the lake. The duo could not find out in
which direction the boar went. Did it cross the canal and go deeper into the
forest? Or did it run on the banks of the canal?

They could see the huge Veeranarayana Lake through the canal. They could see
a boat on the lake. They could also see that all the passengers on board were
women. But they could not recognize them from that distance. At first it
appeared that the boat was coming towards their direction. Then the boat turned
and went towards an islet near the bank. After some time the boat disappeared
from their view.

“Vandhiya Theva, did you see that? Who were in that boat? I think all of them
were women.”

“I too think so, Prince. But I don’t know who they are.”

“Perhaps the women are from Sambuvaraiyar’s household.”

“Quite possible. But why should they come this far?”

“You are right. It can’t be them. But are you sure that Pazhuvettaraiyar has left
Kadambur?”

“I am sure, Your Highness. I saw the gates of Palace being opened in the
morning and his leaving on an elephant’s back.”

“Did he go alone?”

“Yes, he did. The Junior Queen did not accompany the old man.”

“When are we going to see another warrior like him? You know my grandfather
Malaiyaman too is a great warrior. But I’d rate him only next to
Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

“Your Highness, I’ve heard people talking about these old men. But I have seen
your valour in the battlefield with my own eyes. I saw it in the Kadambur Palace
as well. You made them all, young and old, shake in fear.”

“That’s true. I made that kind of a fuss for a specific reason. I wanted to drive
that old man away so that I can do something which I’ve wanted to do for ages.
The time has come now. But you know my mind and my body are trembling.
You can never see a worse coward than me in the whole Chozha Kingdom.”

“Your Highness, I’ve been watching you since this morning. You don’t appear to
be trembling in fear. On the other hand you made all those wild animals and the
birds, why, even those who came with you tremble in fear.”

“Do you call that bravery? Do you think hunting is an act of valour? A hunting
dog at times kills a leopard. A wild boar fights with the mighty elephant.
Hunting is not act of valour. Listen, my dear friend, my conspiracy worked.
Pazhuvettaraiyar has left Nandini alone. But I am still afraid of meeting her and
talking to her.”

“I can understand, Prince. You had a soft corner for her all these years. But now
you know that she is your own sister. She is now working with the conspirators
of Pandya Kingdom. She is keen on destroying the entire Chozha clan. It is very
difficult to discuss these things with her. I could not do that, Prince, though I had
an opportunity to do so.”

“My dear friend, I was shocked by this new development. I could not believe
even now that she could be my sister. But when I think of what happened in the
past it looks quite credible. In those days there was a screen between me and

Nandini. Queen Mother - I mean Sembian Madevi - was particular that I should
not have anything to do with Nandini. But she never told us the whole truth. If
only she had, we could have avoided many complications.”

“Even the Queen Mother might not know, Your Highness. She might have
thought of Nandini as an orphan girl. She might not have known that Nandini is
the daughter of Emperor Sundara Chozhan.”

Chapter 42 - “She Is Not A Woman”

The Crown Prince was lost in thoughts. Childhood memories flooded his mind.
For a while, they made his mind boil and then disappeared giving place to other
memories. Karikalan forcefully controlled those thoughts and as a sign of victory
let out a long sigh. He spoke to Vandhiya Thevan in a calm voice.

“Let bygones be bygones. Let’s just talk about the future. That was the reason I
pulled you out of the crowd. Looks like we have lost the bet, for the wild boar is
nowhere to be seen. Vallavaraiya, Let us use this time to discuss what should be
done now and how should we do it. I shudder to think how I am going to talk to
Nandini about the blood relationship I share with her. I can’t even look at her
face now. When I accidentally see her face she retains the expression she had
when she pleaded for the life of Veerapandiyan. Her eyes seem at that time like a
sharp sword which pierces my heart. My heart bleeds when I think that my own
sister, my own blood, out of her love for Veerapandiyan so passionately pleaded
for his life. What do you think Vandhiya Theva? Do you think she does not
know the truth yet? Do you think that she still does not know that she is the
Emperor’s daughter and my dear sister?”

“My Lord, if she had known she would not have joined hands with the
conspirators of Pandya Kingdom. If only she had known that the Emperor is her
father she would not have let a child sit on a throne and crowned him as the King
of Pandyas and the Emperor of the Chozha Kingdom. She would not have
drawn her sword and would not have sworn to save the Crown and the throne
even at the cost of her life. I saw all these things in Thiruppurambayam War
Memorial at midnight on that fateful day. Yes, my Lord, that is not hearsay; I
saw it with my own eyes.”

“I am surprised why she let you live after you had seen all those things.”

“There is nothing odd about it, my Lord. It might be due to the natural
compassion in any woman’s heart.”

“Vandhiya Theva, you are innocent. You do not know about the ways of the
world. You don’t know the deceit and treachery that can lie in a woman’s heart. I
don’t know why she let you go alive. But I know intuitively why she sent a
secret message to me to come here to Kadambur.”

“Why, Prince?”

“She wants to kill me. She wants to take revenge for the death of Veerapandiyan.
“

“Your Highness, Princess Kunthavai and the Chief Minister sent me here
precisely to avert that kind of a catastrophe. I told you several times not to go to
Kadambur. But you never listened to me, Prince.”

“Vandhiya Theva, Kunthavai and the Chief Minister are very intelligent people.
But even then they cannot block the hands of Destiny. I think Destiny wants to
vindicate what the astrologers told about my brother Arulmozhi - that he will be
the Emperor of the three worlds. And perhaps that was the reason Destiny pulled
me up here. Who knows what will happen to me here? Vandhiya Theva, did you
see Kandhanmaran shooting the arrow from behind? Did he want to hit the bear
or me?”

“I didn’t see, my Lord. But I don’t think Kandhanmaran will stoop to the level of

such a blatant betrayal. I don’t think Kandhanmaran will kill his guest, and that
too the Emperor’s son and that too from behind. No, he won’t do that, Your
Highness. Well, I don’t have any regards for his intelligence. He was slain and
was lying unconscious. It was I who carried him from there and saved him.
Because I was the first person he saw after he opened his eyes he thought that I
was the one who stabbed him. Since that day he considers me his first enemy
and has been hostile to me. He may not be smart; but he is not treacherous, my
Lord. He could not have done that.”

“My dear friend, you don’t know the seductive powers of a beautiful woman. It
can even make the best of men to betray.”

“My Lord, I too know something about the seductive charms of a woman. But
never in my life will I betray any one.”

“Oh! But Manimekalai is a good girl. She will never induce you to do an act of
betrayal.”

“I am not talking of Manimekalai, My Lord. Do you think fireflies will appear
attractive to a man who has seen the Full Moon itself?”

“Whom do you call as Full Moon?”

“Please bear with me, my Lord. I am referring to the Princess at Pazhaiyaarai.”

“ Upstart! You naughty boy! The greatest kings on earth are longing for

Kunthavai’s hand. You should not even think of my sister in that manner.”

“Prince, the Full Moon gives its rays to the Emperors of the world. Even the
poor and homeless delight in the rays of the moon. Who can prevent them?”

“You are right. There is no point in getting angry with you. In fact I intentionally
sent you to my sister with a message. I think she must be pleased with you.
Otherwise you won’t talk like this. But don’t share this with Parthibendra
Pallavan. His long term dream is to become the son-in-law of the Chozha
Emperor and thereby become the King of Thondai Mandalam.”

“That must have been the situation some time before. Not now, Your Highness.
Right now Parthibendran and Kandhanmaran are at the feet of Nandini Devi.
Her slightest whim is a divine command to them. They are ready to give their
lives for her.”

“I have been watching that development, my friend. In fact I am a little afraid of
those two people now.”

“Considering the developments I think it is high time that you meet Nandini and
tell her truth.”

“My dear friend, I don’t think I’d have the courage to do that. Why don’t you
speak to her on my behalf?”

“She won’t believe me, my Lord. Once I deceived her and went away from her

hold. So she might think even this is a kind of deception.”

“But tell me how I can meet Nandini alone. She is always in the ladies’
chambers.”

“I can help you, Prince. Through Manimekalai. Leave it to me.”

“Looks like Manimekalai will dance to your tunes. That’s a good development.
If I manage to get her married to you, I’ll be happy.”

“No, my Lord. I consider Manimekalai as my sister. I want her to marry
somebody far higher in stature than me.”

“I don’t get it.”

“That’s news to me, my Lord. I am sure that the girl has reserved a soft corner
for herself in the heart of the Crown Prince of Chozha Kingdom. Honestly,
Prince, I talked about Manimekalai as firefly compared to the Full Moon of
Kunthavai. But the truth is that no one in this world with the only exception of
Princess Kunthavai can be equal to Manimekalai in intelligence and qualities. If
you married Manimekalai all our problems will be solved. Sambuvaraiyar and
Kandhanmaran will come to our side. Pazhuvettaraiyars will be isolated. Nandini
too will be weakened. Madhuranthakan cannot even dream of becoming the
King. We will crush the conspiracy of the Chieftains; we can destroy the diabolic
plans of the body-guards of Pandyas.”

“Thambi, you are right. But I have not come to Kadambur to get married. I think
we are caught. I am sure Pazhuvettaraiyar is going to come back to Kadambur
with a big army.”

“Then why don’t we send word to your grandfather, the King of Thirukkovalur
to come with an army? Should we not be prepared for such an eventuality?”

“I am thinking of that. At times I can’t control my temper. I want to raze this
Kadambur Palace to the ground and hang all those bloody conspirators at the
palace gates. I am controlling myself only because of my father. If only you had
brought him to Kanchi... “

“Prince, even to deliver your letter... Oh My God... that was the hardest mission I
ever handled.”

“Yes. The Emperor is virtually held as a hostage by the Pazhuvettaraiyars. I have
built a Golden Palace for my parents at Kanchi. The Palace is vacant; only bats
are living there now. I don’t think I will have the blessing of receiving my
parents in the Palace when I am alive. I don’t think I’ll go out of Kadambur
alive.”

“I am worried, my Lord. No I am frightened. As I hear you talk I think it is all
the more necessary to summon the armed forces of King Malaiyaman.”

“I am thinking of deputing you for that purpose.”

“I am sorry, Your Highness. I have strict orders from your sister never to leave
you alone even for a second.”

“You have been true to your orders till now.”

“Parthibendra Pallavan does not have much to do in Kadambur Palace. He finds
it difficult to while away his time.”

“You are right. Every second he does not see Nandini is like a century to him. I
never thought Parthibendran will become a slave to a woman’s beauty. Let us
send him to Malaiyaman.”

“That’s the right thing to do, My Lord.”

“If something happens in his absence you are there to protect me.”

“Prince, whether I am there or not, whether anybody is there or not to guard you,
I am sure no one in this world will dare to hurt you. Those old warriors were
talking derisively about you in your absence; but they have been trembling in
fear ever since they saw you.”

“Thambi, I am not afraid of any man who wants to fight with me with a sword
face to face. I am frightened of those like Kandhanmaran who want to kill me
from behind.”

“But my Lord, you have again started accusing Kandhanmaran.”

“Listen, Thambi. I am afraid of the evil in a woman’s heart. As I think of what a
woman’s heart can hold I tremble in fear. When she sees me in that mysterious
way I feel a spear is piercing my chest. When I think of her I become weak in
my legs.”

“My Lord, yes, you should fear Nandini. I am not denying that. I know the kind
of hatred that resides in her heart. When I think of why she let me go on that day
I am afraid there might be a treacherous plan behind that seemingly innocent act.
But all these fears arise because she does not know the truth. If you tell her that
you are her brother then all our fears and worries will go away.”

“Do you think so, Vallavaraiya? You are smart. But you are too innocent to know
how a woman’s mind will think. If Nandini knows that she is Sundara Chozhan’s
daughter her hatred will become a hundred fold. Even if we all promise to make
her the Empress of Chozha Kingdom she won’t be pacified.”

“Prince, if that is what you think, then leave the job to me. I’ll reveal the secret
to Nandini Devi and try to pacify her.”

“Even you can’t do that, my friend. No one can assuage her hard feelings.
Listen. If our Chozha clan has to be saved either I have to die. Or she has to die.
Or both have to die. Let me kill her with the same sword which I used on
Veerapandiyan.”

“What is this, Prince? Why do you talk like that?”

“Vandhiya Theva, it is all right to kill a person to save a Kingdom. What if the
person killed happens to be a woman? What if the woman happens to be my own
sister? In fact Nandini is not a woman. She is a devil in the guise of a woman.
And if we let her live the great Chozha clan which has been flourishing since the
time of Vijayalaya Chozha will go to dogs. Oh My God! What is that?”

Adithya Karikalan was startled by the sudden noise.

There was some rustling sound coming from the bushes nearby. It appeared that
somebody was fighting there. They rode to that place. It was a very rare sight. A
wild boar was fighting with a leopard.

“Aha! The man we have been searching for is here,” shouted Karikalan. He was
obviously referring to the wild boar which they were chasing a little while ago.

“I think the leopard will finish him. We won’t have anything to do.”

“Do you think so? Just watch the fun.”

It was an interesting sight. The Leopard pounced on the boar and was trying to
kill it with its teeth and claws. But the thick skin of the boar did not yield to the
leopard’s attacks. Soon the boar got the upper hand. It ran towards the leopard
and with its short horns knocked down to the ground and gave hell to the wild
cat. The long teeth of the boar tore the skin of the leopard. When finally the boar
knocked it down for a second time the leopard lay on the ground dead.

“Thambi, the leopard is dead. The boar will now turn towards us. Let us be
prepared.”

Karikalan loaded his bow with an arrow and aimed at the boar.

The arrow hit the neck of the boar. The boar shook his body. The arrow fell
down. It turned around to look at the two horses and the riders. Then it saw the
fallen leopard. The boar was sure no harm would come from the wild cat. It now
sprang on the horses with enormous ferocity. Before Karikalan could load his
bow with an arrow the boar attacked his horse. The horse was overwhelmed by
the sudden attack causing it to shift its hind legs. They were caught in the roots
of a tree. The horse could no longer sustain its balance and it fell down.
Karikalan was trapped under the horse. The boar retreated a few steps and went
for the fallen horse with even greater ferocity.

Chapter 43 - Where Is The Leopard?

Vandhiya Thevan was quick to find out that Adithya Karikalan was in danger. In
a flash he rode towards the wild boar and inserted his spear into its thick skin.
The spear was stuck. The boar shook itself violently and turned around to look at
the aggressor. Vandhiya Thevan lost the grip of the handle. Soon the spear fell
off from the body of the beast.

The boar now turned towards Vandhiya Thevan. It was only then that he realised
that he was trapped. His horse could not withstand the onslaught. He was
unarmed. The only weapon he carried, a spear, was no longer with him. The
Prince was still caught under his horse and was trying to come out. The only way
out for Vandhiya Thevan was to grab the branch of a tree without getting down
from the horse. After having escaped so many great dangers in the recent past
Vandhiya Thevan detested being killed by a wild boar.

Thank God there was a low lying branch nearby. Vandhiya Thevan sprang to the
branch from the horse. He held the branch with all his strength and climbed on to
the branch. At the same time the boar attacked his horse. The horse lost its
balance and was about to fall down. It somehow managed to avoid the fall and
run away.

Karikalan was still trapped under his horse. Vandhiya Thevan was dangerously
perched on the tree-branch. The boar stood between the two men looking at them
alternately.

It was perhaps making a judgment as to whom should it attack first. The Prince
had not yet come out from under his horse. Even if he did, whether he would be

able to handle the boar without any weapon or help was a big question. Of
course he had his bow and arrows. But it may take some time to load the arrow
in the bow and shoot. The boar might take advantage of the time-gap and might
attack him. Again the Prince might have been seriously injured. So the best
strategy available to Vandhiya Thevan now was to distract the boar and attract it
towards him, so that the Prince could buy some precious time.

Vandhiya Thevan thought fast. He made several quick decisions. He shook the
branch he was sitting on and made some strange sounds with his mouth with a
view to distract the boar.

His strategy worked. The boar ran ferociously towards the tree.

“Let it come. Let the wild beast hit against the strong tree trunk.” Vandhiya
thought with a glee. His happiness did not last long. The branch on which he was
sitting cracked with a huge noise.

Oh My God! What is this? If I were to fall along with the branch, the boar’s teeth
will tear me apart the very next second. I have to get hold of another branch.
NOW!

Vandhiya Thevan tried to grab another branch. The branch was a little away.
Only one of his hands could reach the branch. The branch was frail. His hand
started to slip. His legs were dangling in the air.

Oh My God! There is no other way. I have to fall down to instantaneous death.
But I am happy that I could save the Crown Prince in my dying moments.
Karikalan is likely to tell this to Kunthavai. She will be happy. And she is likely

to shed a few drops of tears for me. That is more than enough for me.

Vandhiya Thevan heard a terrible noise. His hands slipped from the branch. He
closed his eyes and fell down with a noisy thud. And soon became unconscious.

When he came back he saw Adithya Karikalan sprinkling water on him. He sat
up.

“My God! Prince, you are alive!”

“Yes, I am, thanks to your help.”

“What happened to the boar?”

“It’s there.”

Vandhiya Thevan looked in that direction. The boar lay dead.

Vandhiya Thevan looked at it for some time.

“Your Highness, such a small animal gave us so much trouble! Whatever
Kandhanmaran said about the wild boars of this area is true. But tell me, my
Lord, how did you manage to kill the beast?”

“I didn’t kill. It was you. And your spear.”

Vandhiya Thevan was puzzled.

“You have put my spear to the best possible use. But I didn’t do anything, my
Lord. I am ashamed that I could not help when you were in danger.”

“Didn’t you shake the branch and shout at the beast? I came out from under my
horse at that time. I took your spear. I vented all my pent up fury on the boar.
Poor beast! As soon as the spear hit its body it made a terrible sound. I thought
I’d go deaf hearing that sound. But it did not die of the spear alone. You fell
from the tree. You fell right on the boar. The beast died of shock.”

Adithya Karikalan laughed. Vandhiya Thevan joined him.

“Because I fell on the boar I was not injured. You know, my Lord, our
mythology tells the story of our kind Lord who took the form of a boar to kill a
demon. Till now I could not believe that. But after seeing the antics of this wild
boar our mythology seems credible to me. Oh My God! What a ferocious beast!”

“Don’t judge the incarnation of Varaha (boar) by this little beast. In the forest
ranges of Vindhya in the North there lives a boar with a single horn. It’s as huge
as an elephant. If this boar were to be of that size and if it had hit the tree with all
its force just imagine what would have happened to the tree?”

“The tree would have been uprooted. The spear you threw would have been
broken. We would have been killed. That would have saved the trouble for the
enemies of the Chozha clan.”

“Thambi, tell me the truth. When my horse fell down you threw the spear. Was it
for the boar or for me?”

Vandhiya Thevan was furious.

“My Lord, is that you who are asking this question? If you don’t trust me you
could have killed me. Why did you kill the boar and save me?”

“Yes, yes. I should not doubt your intentions. If you had not shaken the tree
branch and made that terrible noise the boar would have killed me. But when
you threw the spear I had my doubts. You know nowadays I suspect everything
and everybody. I can’t shake off the thought that the Lord of Death is constantly
following me. I thought that the Lord of Death came in the form of a boar.”

“That’s a good sign, my Lord. Death that followed you is dead. All our worries
are gone. And we have won in our challenge with Kandhanmaran. Let us drag
this boar. Shall we leave now?”

“What’s the need to hurry? I am tired. Why don’t we relax here for a while?”

“I am hearing for the first time that you are tired. Yes, you should be, my Lord,
for you were caught under the horse for a long time.”

“That’s nothing. More than my body, my mind is tired. Should we go back in the
way we came and join those idiots? Why don’t we cross the lake and go to the
other bank?”

“My God! How can we swim across this lake which resembles an ocean? After
saving me from the boar you want to have me killed in this lake?”

“I now remember - you can’t swim. I too can’t swim across such a huge lake. If
we get a boat it’d be easy. Didn’t we see a boat a little while ago? It must be
somewhere near on this bank. Why don’t we go look for it?”

“Our horses? Should we leave them as prey for the wild animals of the forest?”

Vandhiya Thevan first spoke in a teasing tone. Then he remembered something
and stood up startled.

“OH MY GOD! WHERE THE HELL IS THE LEOPARD?”

“It has completely slipped from my mind. It should be hiding somewhere. The
Lord of Death might come in the form of a leopard as well. To kill me here.”

The two men looked around. Vandhiya Thevan shouted after some time.
“There!”

There was a canal which fed water into the lake. The canal became gradually
narrow as it approached the lake. In the narrow section of the canal a tree had
fallen and it kind of acted as a bridge between the two banks of the canal. The
leopard was walking over the fallen tree.

The same thought flashed in the minds of both the men.

“My God! The women in the boat!” The two men shouted simultaneously.

“They must have got down at the island near the canal.” - Vandhiya Thevan.

“Wounded leopards are very dangerous.”

“Let’s kill the leopard and take it along with the boar.”

“How can we cross this canal? We can walk over the fallen tree; but not our
horses.”

“There is not much water flowing in the canal. We can get down and walk
through the canal along with the horses.”

Meanwhile Karikalan’s horse had gone near Vandhiya Thevan’s horse. It
appeared as if the horses, like their Masters, were exchanging notes in their own
horse language about the dangers they faced. The men mounted on the horses.
They led the horses to the canal. The water level was low. But it was quite

muddy. The horses had a hard time crossing the canal.

Vandhiya Thevan thought of the quick sand in Kodikkarai. “Compared to those
death traps this is a breeze.” He described them to the Crown Prince.

“My dear friend! You are worried about the quick sand outside. What do you
think of the mud in the minds of people? If someone gets caught in the quick
sand of evil thoughts it will be very difficult for him to come out of it.”

Vandhiya Thevan pitied the Prince. Poor soul, his mind was muddy as the canal,
he thought.

The horses reached the other bank of the canal after a great deal of trouble. The
two men looked carefully in all the directions before riding on. Karikalan was
ready with his bow and arrows. Vandhiya Thevan was ready to throw the spear
on the leopard.

Suddenly a woman’s shrill voice was heard over the usual sounds of the forest “Amma! Leopard! Danger! Amma! Leopard!”

When Manimekalai saw the leopard on the tree branch one of the maids who
was cooking in the Mandapam also saw the animal and shrieked. The two men
heard the noise. Their hairs stood straight. They rode fast in the direction of the
voice. As soon as they negotiated the turn they were shocked by what they saw.

Nandini and Manimekalai were climbing down the steps to bath in the lake. At

the same time the leopard was slowly climbing up the branches of the tree. The
leopard was badly hurt in its fight with the wild boar. Survival should have been
topmost in the mind of the jungle cat. But nobody else knew what was in its
mind.

Karikalan and Vandhiya Thevan thought that the leopard was going to pounce on
the two women soon.

Vandhiya Thevan was hesitant to use the spear. If it missed the mark and fell on
the ladies.... it might kill them. Karikalan was not hesitant. He loaded his bow
with an arrow and aimed a shot at the leopard. The arrow landed on the leopard’s
stomach. The leopard roared and pounced on the two women. Nobody knew
what happened. The leopard and the two women were not to be seen.

A few minutes later all three appeared in different places in the lake. A part of
the lake became red mixed with blood.

Chapter 44 - Love And Revenge

The friends watched the events unfolding before them with a sense of awe and
wonder. They jumped off their horses. They came running to the banks of the
lake. By that time the leopard had gone deeper into the water. From the way the
leopard floated on the surface of water it was clear that it was dead. The men
badly wanted to know if the women were hurt. The two men sprang into the
water and went in search of the women.

Vandhiya Thevan was cautious. He swam towards Manimekalai. He was afraid
of going near Nandini. Manimekalai was not hurt. She had fallen into water
because of the shock caused by the leopard’s sudden fall. As her fall was quite
sudden she was gasping for breath. She was not hurt. When she saw Vandhiya
Thevan coming near her she became ecstatic and closed her eyes unable to
control her happiness.

Hence she did not know that Karikalan stopped Vandhiya Thevan by holding his
hands and asked him to go towards Nandini. Karikalan now swam towards
Manimekalai. Poor girl, Manimekalai, she did not open her eyes till Karikalan
hugged her, lifted her and then carried her to the shore and gently placed her
down. Only when the Crown Prince placed his fingers beneath her nose to check
whether she was breathing she slowly opened her eyes. She thought that her
saviour was her beloved Vandhiya Thevan. And she tried her best to express all
her love and gratitude through her first glance. The moment she recognized the
Crown Prince she stood up and moved away from him.

The obvious disappointment in her face did not escape the attention of the
Crown Prince. He laughed.

“What is this Manimekalai? Why do you hate me so much?”

“No. I don’t hate you, Prince. How can a girl not feel shy when some stranger
touches her?”

“Silly girl! You have made me a stranger. Don’t you know that your people are
planning to get us married?”

“Till their plans materialize you will be a stranger to me.”

“But you can tell me whether you like this alliance or not.”

The Princess of Kadambur thought for a while.

“Your Highness! You are a descendant of the famous Chozha clan. You know the
ways of the world. Tell me whether it is proper to talk like this to a small girl?
Shouldn’t you talk to my father?”

“Listen Girl, if your father agrees, will you?”

“If my father agrees to the match and then he asks me I’ll give a suitable answer
to him. I feel very shy to talk to you on this subject. You saved me from the
leopard. You saved me from drowning. As an expression of gratitude I have been
patient till now.”

Karikalan laughed again.

“Manimekalai, you are very smart. You are a deep person. Even then you are
disappointed. But don’t try to deceive me.”

“Oh My God! What are you talking, Your Highness! How can a small girl like
me deceive the Crown Prince? What for? And pray, how?”

“Why are you beating around the bush? If Vandhiya Thevan had carried you
ashore instead of me will you be using the same harsh words against him? You
closed your eyes thinking that Vandhiya Thevan is coming to save you. You
opened your eyes hoping to see only him. And poor girl, you were
disappointed.”

Manimekalai was shy at first. And then afraid. She took some time to gather
herself.

“Prince, you know what is in my mind. Then why are you still testing the
waters?”

“Manimekalai, I know what’s in your mind. I also know what’s in Vandhiya
Thevan’s mind as well. I think that Vandhiya Thevan does not deserve your love.
See there. Vandhiya Thevan and Nandini are playing games of love. See the
happiness in Nandini’s face.”

Manimekalai looked in the direction pointed out by the Crown Prince.
Manimekalai’s mind which was as white as milk till then was poisoned by
feelings of envy.

Vandhiya Thevan and Nandini were in conversation. The leopard’s claw had hurt
Nandini’s shoulders. She was bleeding. But unlike Manimekalai Nandini did not
make any attempt to close her eyes. She did not take any effort to free herself
from the hands of Vandhiya Thevan. But Vandhiya Thevan felt as if he were
carrying a live flame and was in a hurry to let her down. Nandini had remained
in water for some time. And yet her body was hot.

A vague fear crept into the mind of Vandhiya Thevan. He was shivering. Nandini
smiled.

“Why are you trembling in fear? Did you mistake me for the leopard? Or
perhaps you wanted to save the leopard; and by mistake you saved me. A case of
mistaken identity. I hope you are regretting your decision.”

“Please, Devi, please don’t use harsh words on me. I am shaken because I was
forced to touch you and carry you.”

“Guilty minds get shaken. That’s the rule.”

“I am innocent, Devi.”

“Are you sure? You sought my help to get into Thanjavur Fort. I gave my signet

ring to you. Then you entered my private chambers by stealth. I saved you from
near death. And pray, how did you repay your gratitude? You ran away from me.
You simply vanished without caring to take leave of me. You promised to come
to me after meeting the Princess at Pazhaiyaarai. And you went back on your
word. Do you still consider yourself innocent?”

“Yes, I accept the charges levelled against me. But I have my reasons, Devi. I am
after all a paid servant. I am bound by the orders of Adithya Karikalan. And if
you consider my circumstances you’ll never accuse me, Devi.”

“Yes. Even to save a woman from the mouth of a leopard you need to have the
orders of your Boss, Karikalan. I was watching. The Prince showed an unusual
interest in rescuing Manimekalai. I think he would have been glad if I had
drowned. And without knowing what is there in the mind of your employer you
have saved me.”

“Please, Devi. Please don’t talk like that. The Crown Prince has come all the
way from Kanchi because of the message you sent to him.”

“But you came running to block his coming here. You came with a message
from Princess Kunthavai. But you failed in your grand mission. Remember
whenever you interfere with my work it will be a failure for you.”

Nandini’s words confused Vandhiya Thevan. He was dying to know the real
meaning of her words. So he examined her face for clues. Nandini’s face was
devoid of any expression but for her usual bland smile.

Nandini continued.

“Your guilt is evident from your face. On that fateful New Moon night you were
caught by my men. If I had half-winked my eyes you would have been killed in
no time. I forgot the past and did my best to save you. And you never cared to
thank me for that that. I’ve never seen such an ungrateful creature on earth.”

“I promise, Devi, my heart is full of gratitude for you.”

“I have been in this town for several days. And you never met me even once to
express that gratitude. How can I believe you?”

“I thought of meeting you in person to convey the feelings of gratitude. But,
Devi, the circumstances were not favourable.”

“You did not do anything to create favourable circumstances. You could have at
least given me a sign, a glance, a look or some signal. You never did that. You
never even turned to look at me.”

“Devi, you are the wife of Chancellor of Exchequer of the Chozha Kingdom.”

“Now you are teasing me. You are insinuating that I am married to an old man!”

“Not at all, Devi. If I tease you I’ll go to hell.”

“No need for that now. Whatever it is don’t mention that I am the wife of
Pazhuvettaraiyar. I am not his wife.”

“Oh My God! What are you saying?”

“Nothing but the bitter truth. If a girl is forcibly abducted and brought home will
she become the abductor’s wife by default?”

“Devi, you are a girl from Tamilnadu. I am sure you won’t do anything that goes
against the rules of virtue applicable to women.”

“Yes, I know those rules. If a Tamil woman loses her heart to a man she will
consider him and only him as her husband. A forced marriage will never bind
her.”

“But ... but... you... Devi... “

“I know what you are coming to. How did I consent to a forced marriage with
Pazhuvettaraiyar? It was for an important reason. There is another special trait of
Tamilnadu women. They will never rest till they have avenged the injustice
meted out to them. You did not help me to find my love; please help me at least
to seek revenge.”

Nandini’s last words tore Vandhiya Thevan’s heart. He felt as if he had been hit
by a lightning. He was in a state of shock.

“Devi! Devi! What is this? What is the connection between me and your love?
What is the connection between love and revenge?”

“There is a connection. But right now I don’t have the time to explain. See there.
The Prince and Manimekalai are coming towards us. If you come to my room by
midnight tomorrow I’ll tell you everything.”

“How it is possible, Devi? You are in the highly guarded ladies’ chamber. How
can I come there alone? And that too at midnight?”

“Didn’t you escape from the same ladies chambers once? Why can’t you use the
same way? Of course only if you want to; only if you have the will to come.”

Vandhiya Thevan was in a state of perfect shock now. But Nandini’s face did not
show any expression other than her usual seductive smile.

Chapter 45 - “You Are My Sister”

Karikalan and Manimekalai reached Vandhiya Thevan and Nandini.

The Prince was looking at Vandhiya Thevan till he reached the place. Only then
did he see Nandini. He saw red lines on her cheek and shoulder. He saw blood.

“Oh My God! Were you hurt by the bloody leopard?”

“Yes, Your Highness. But the damned animal could only hurt my body. Not my
mind.”

The words went deep into the heart of the Crown Prince. Before he could
respond Manimekalai went near Nandini and spoke with trepidation.

“Yes, Akka! The wounds appear deep. Thank God, I have brought some
ointment. Come with me. I’ll apply it. You will be fine soon.”

“My dearest sister, I am used to being hurt. I have sustained much deeper
wounds which have healed in the course of time. But tell me do you have any
ointment for the wounds in one’s heart.”

“Sure, Akka. I do have. Come with me.” Manimekalai held Nandini’s hand and

virtually dragged her to the Mandapam.

The Prince and Vandhiya Thevan followed them maintaining a respectable
distance. They sat on a marble bench beneath a huge mango tree near the
Mandapam.

“Prince, the sooner we get out of this place the better for us. If we stay here any
longer Kandhanmaran or his father might think ill of us.”

“Let them think whatever they want to. They cannot kill us for this indiscretion,
right? It is enough if these women do not think ill of us. Let’s wait till they come
back. We’ll take leave of them and go.”

A few minutes later Nandini and Manimekalai returned. They had changed.
Nandini’s wounds were covered by a dark paste.

“We are waiting to take leave of you.”

“It’s late in the afternoon. Having come thus far and having saved us from
danger it is but proper that you should have lunch with us. If I let you go then
Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter will never forgive me.”

“We’ll stay but on one condition. Manimekalai has applied some ointment on
your wounds. She told me that she had some ointment for the wounds of the
heart as well. If you promise to tell us about that magical ointment we’ll stay
back. “

“Why should we ask her? Can’t we make a guess?”

“Perhaps she talks of time which kind of heals all the wounds in the heart.”

“No, it can’t be. There are some wounds which even time can’t heal.”

Vandhiya Thevan intervened.

“There is an excellent ointment for women. That’s called tears.”

Nandini retorted.

“The Prince of Vallam was perhaps waiting for an opportunity to insult women.
But what he says is not right. With some kind of wounds women even lose their
capacity to shed tears. Then how will it be useful as a medicine?”

“Well, Devi, if you think we are not right, tell us what you think is right.”

“Why not? My dear sister, the ointment you referred goes to the heart through
one’s ears. I am sure you allude to music that comes from Yazh, the flute and
from a sweet human voice. Am I right?”

“You are, Akka. But how did you know?”

“Didn’t I tell you that I am a sorceress? I have magical powers. I can divine what
is there in the mind of others. But, do you two accept the power of music to heal
the wounds in one’s heart?”

“We do. I also accept my defeat in not being able to guess that. I now remember
what Kandhanmaran told about his sister Manimekalai - that she can play the
Yazh very well.”

“That is how a brother should be. Unless he sings the praises of his sister at least
once the day is wasted for him. Yes, whatever he says about Manimekalai’s
musical talents is true. She has brought the instrument with her. Thank God she
is not forced to display her talents before somebody like me - you know I am
almost stone-deaf. Gentlemen, you saved us from being devoured by the leopard.
Please give us an opportunity to express our gratitude. You should have lunch
with us. And stay with us to enjoy Princess Manimekalai’s musical
performance.”

Vandhiya Thevan gave a secret signal to the Crown Prince not to accept the
invitation. But the Crown Prince did not notice him at all.

“We are ready to do whatever the Princesses want us to do.” - The Crown Prince
was enthusiastic.

“Manimekalai, your dream has come true. Please have a look at the cooking
arrangements. You have to hasten your cooks. We can’t keep these men waiting
for long.”

Manimekalai ran towards the place where the maids were busy cooking.
Vandhiya Thevan stood up and looked around.

Nandini saw him.

“Didn’t I tell you that I have the powers to divine what’s there in others’ minds?
I want to test my powers now. Shall I tell you what’s going on in the mind of the
Vallam Prince?”

Karikalan smiled at her.

“Please.”

“He thinks that it was a great blunder to have killed the leopard and saved these
two women. He thinks it would have been much better if we two had gone into
the leopard’s stomach.”

Karikalan laughed.

“My dear friend, is she right?”

“No, Your Highness. I never thought like that. But I have to give it to this noble
lady that I was thinking about the leopard and these two women. I was

wondering how the leopard managed to live after being caught by these
women.”

“What happened to you, Thambi? Why are you blabbering? Is it alive? Again?
Didn’t we see the dead body floating on water?”

The Crown Prince stood up.

“Look there, Your Highness.”

From where they stood they could see the water-body between the branches of
the trees. The boat used by the women was tied to the tree. The leopard was
trying to get into the boat.

Karikalan smiled as he spoke.

“Aha! The leopard has a strong will. Looks like it is not destined to die.”

“Come, Prince, let’s go and kill the leopard. A wounded leopard is dangerous.”

“Brave Warrior of the Vana Clan, does a wounded leopard require two great
warriors? I’ll call Manimekalai. She has a small knife in her hand. And that is
more than enough to kill the beast.”

“See my friend, the Queen of Pazhuvur has high regards for our valour. Do you
think I should also come along? Aren’t you enough?”

“Or shall I send Manimekalai?” - Nandini asked.

Vandhiya Thevan murmured:

“Yes, you can send her. But the problem is that she might apply some ointment
and revive the animal. “

“What are you thinking?” The Crown Prince asked Vandhiya Thevan.

“I am thinking of bringing the head of the wounded leopard and place it at the
feet of the Pazhuvur Queen. Let me see at least if that makes her happy.”

Vandhiya Thevan walked away with these words.

“Did you hear what the ruffian said? Do you think it requires much valour to
behead a wounded leopard?”

Karikalan started to laugh at his own joke. He stopped after seeing the
expression on Nandini’s face.

“You are the best person to give an opinion on that.” Nandini’s words were very
sharp. She probably alluded to the Crown Prince beheading Veerapandiyan when
he was wounded and helpless.

Karikalan told her in a choked voice.

“Nandini I came here only because you sent message through Kandhanmaran.
Otherwise I would not have come at all.”

“You acceded to my request at least now. Thanks a lot.”

“I thought that you had forgotten the past. And that was why you invited me
here.”

“How can I forget the past, Prince? Tell me have you forgotten?”

“Yes, I too can’t. You were in tears. You begged a boon from me. I brutally
refused. I was in a state of frenzy at that time. No, I have not forgotten anything.
But tell me why did you ask me to come here?”

“Prince, you have not visited Thanjavur for the past three years. You have not
seen your sick father.”

“He is not only my father but... “

“Yes, I know. He is also the father of Princess Kunthavai as well as Ponniyin
Selvan. But your father misses you a lot. Somebody has told the Emperor that I
am the reason for your not coming to the capital. The Emperor hates me because
of that and has not seen me even once. You have done enough harm to me,
Prince. Why do you want to add this blame also to my account?”

“But that is the truth. I did not come to Thanjavur because of you.”

“Then let me leave Thanjavur immediately. You come to the town, become the
next Emperor and... “

“That will never happen, Nandini. I am not keen on the Chozha Throne. Let
Madhuranthakan be crowned the King. Let him rule the Kingdom.”

“Prince, you know Madhuranthakan very well. He cannot govern this huge
Empire.”

“So what? The Pazhuvettaraiyars are ready and willing to help him. And you are
there as well.”

“I now know what’s in your mind. Let me go out of Pazhuvur Palace. Let me go
out of Thanjavur. You please come... “

“No! No! Not at all! You got me all wrong. I don’t have any desire to become
the King. I have done enough harm to you in the past. I am not planning to hurt

you anymore. Let me not drive you out of the Pazhuvur Palace and add that to
the list of heinous sins I have committed against you.”

“Prince, why can’t we both live in Thanjavur? That is a large town. Don’t you
think there will not be enough room for both of us in the capital city? Ok, there
is no need for us to meet.”

“Yes, there may not be any necessity for us to meet. But how are we going to
avoid the thoughts in our mind? You told me a little while ago that you can’t
forget the past. You also spoke about the wound in your heart. I too have a
wound in my heart. And I can’t forget the past.”

“You may not be able to forget; can’t you at least forgive? Can’t you forgive
me?”

“Nandini, you never did anything which requires my forgiveness. I was the one
who wronged you. I am the one who should seek your forgiveness. Even when I
left Kanchi I had the idea of seeking your pardon. But what I heard on the way
made me totally unfit even to be pardoned by you.”

“My Lord, your seeking my pardon... well that’s not in any way fit or proper.
You are the first born of the Emperor. I am after all an orphan, a child abandoned
by her parents.”

“No, Nandini. You are not an orphan.”

“Yes, the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was kind enough to accept me as his wife.
Even then..... “

“Not only that, Nandini. I don’t know how I am going to tell this to you... “

“You can tell anything to this inane girl. You need not have any reservation.
Even those who are just roaming on the streets have something to tell me. They
go out of the way to insult me.”

“Nandini, from now on if anybody insults you I can’t be patient. You need to just
tell me. I will punish the person who dares to insult you.”

“You have been affectionate to me right from the beginning. You have even
fought with the Pazhaiyaarai Princess on my behalf. She is your sister, my
Lord.”

“Nandini you too are my sister like Kunthavai. I am your brother.”

“My Lord, since I have become somebody’s wife you are treating me like your
sister. That is something befitting to your lineage. But how can I consider the
Emperor’s son, the one who is born to rule the whole world as my brother?”

“You have not understood me, Nandini. You are really my sister. You are the
Emperor’s daughter.”

Nandini laughed as if she heard a joke.

“Are you all right, Prince? Or have I gone insane? I don’t know.”

“I am sane. So are you.”

“Then why are you teasing an orphan?”

“Look at my eyes, Nandini. Do I look like a person who will tease you?”

“Look at my eyes, Prince. Do I look like the Emperor’s daughter? Do I have any
of the royal signs on my face?”

“Nandini, I have been seeing your face since you were five. I have always been
mesmerized by the radiant beauty of your face. I know the reason for it only
now. Only on my way from Kanchi did I know the reason for your unusual
beauty. Amongst the women married in the Chozha clan there is no one equal to
the beauty of Kalyani, daughter of Vaithumbarayan. Her beauty is world famous.
She is my grandmother. She is still alive. She lives in Pazhaiyaarai now. At
seventy her beauty is still matchless. It is very difficult to look straight into her
face. She is so beautiful. All her beauty has taken refuge in you. I don’t have that
kind of beauty. Nor does Princess Kunthavai or my brother Arulmozhi. My
grandmother’s beauty has come to you through my father.”

“What is that you are talking, Prince? I think I have lost my mind. Or there
should be some problem with my hearing.”

“No, Nandini. You are all right. Your mind is all right. Your ears are working
well. You are my father’s daughter. That makes you my sister. Before marrying
my mother the Emperor fell in love with a noble lady of Srilanka and married
her. You are her daughter. And hence my sister.”

Karikalan was quite enthusiastic.

Nandini appeared shocked. She was staring at the Crown Prince for a while.
Then her face became clear again.

“My Lord, is this the news you came to know after you left Kanchi?”

“Yes, Nandini. Once I knew that, everything became clear. That information was
the missing piece in the jigsaw puzzle of my life.”

“My Lord, who told you that news? Was it by any chance, Vandhiya Thevan?”

“You are right. He told me the news. But he did not say that on his own. Princess
Kunthavai conveyed it through him.”

“Now I understand. People have been conspiring to keep us apart from very
early days. Looks like the conspirators are still busy in their avowed mission.”

“You are wrong, Nandini. There is no conspiracy here. When we were young the
Queen Mother struggled hard to keep us apart. At that time I did not understand
her actions. In fact I was furious with her. Only now I know that she has saved
us from a great disaster. They could have been more transparent. They could
have told us the truth earlier. A great injustice has been meted out to you because
they withheld the truth. They have wronged me as well. Let the past be past. Let
us forget it. Even if we cannot forget let us at least forgive them.”

“Did Vandhiya Thevan tell you just this or is there something more to the story?”

“Why do you use the word ‘story’ Nandini? Don’t you believe that?”

“That is not believable, Prince. If I had been born as the Emperor’s daughter
why should I reach this state? Why did I have to suffer so much? Ok, let it be
true. I want to know whether he said something else.”

Karikalan hesitated. And then poured out everything.

“Yes, he also told me that you are now with the conspirators of the Pandya
Kingdom. And you have taken a vow to destroy the Chozha clan. And that you
are worshipping a knife on whose handle there is the fish emblem of the
Pandyas. He also told me that you crowned a little boy as the Pandya King at the
War Memorial on the banks of Coleroon River. Forget it, Nandini. You too have
a right to share the glory of the Chozha Kingdom. You are the daughter of the
reigning Emperor Sundara Chozhan. You are our dear sister. It will be my first
duty to right all the wrongs done to you.”

“Lord, do you believe these stories? Then why did you wait for so many days?

Why didn’t you try to talk to me earlier?”

“I was confused, Nandini. I needed some time to understand this new
relationship. I was also looking for the right time to explain everything to you.
This is not something which I can share with you in the presence of others.
Thanks to a wild boar and a leopard I got the opportunity today.”

“The wild animals are dangerous. But not as dangerous as human beings. I
realise the truth only now.”

“Sister, you said earlier that we cannot forget the past. I agreed. I asked you to at
least forgive if you can’t forget what happened in the past. You have not
responded to my request till now.”

“My Lord, I’ll forgive whatever you did to me in the past. Perhaps I may forget
them too. But I can never forget or forgive what you did to me today.”

“What did I do today? I never betrayed you or let you down.”

“I am coming to that. Look at that scoundrel.”

“You mean, Vandhiya Thevan?”

“Yes. You asked him to come with the head of the Leopard. He is coming empty
handed. He saw me in Thanjavur one day. He told me that if he was touched

even by my feet he would consider it a blessing. I did not even want to kick him.
I told him I was going to call the guards. He ran away. Because I did not yield to
his lust, he has spun this yarn to you. He promised to bring your head to me if I
wanted to. He is afraid that I might share these things with you. That was why he
went out of the way to prevent your coming to Kadambur. And that is why he
never leaves your side. He is a treacherous black guard. I don’t even want to
touch him with my feet. And you made him hug me and touch all over my body
and carry me from the lake. And you were seeing that with your own eyes. Now
tell me can I ever forget this? Or even forgive?”

Nandini’s eyes had gone red. She was trembling in anger. After hearing her
Karikalan felt giddy. He felt as if the lake, the trees in the forest and the
Mandapam were all going in circles.

“My dear sister, Nandini! Can it be true? I don’t know who I should believe. Can
Vandhiya Thevan be so wicked? I even thought of getting him married to that
silly girl Manimekalai?”

“You need not believe my words, Prince. You always take rash decisions. Please
don’t do that now. Just observe him for two days. You will know.”

Chapter 46 - The Boat Moved Away

Vandhiya Thevan came towards the Prince and Nandini from one side while
Manimekalai came from the other. She was almost running towards them
repeating the words “Akka, lunch is served.”

Karikalan looked in both the directions.

“Nandini, it was not just Vandhiya Thevan who wanted to prevent me from
coming to Kadambur. A Vaishnavite by name Azhwarkkadian too advised me
against this visit. And to cap it all, the Chief Minister, my father’s best friend and
a person whom I worship also gave a similar warning.”

“Chief Minister Aniruddhar is your father’s best friend. And that’s why he wants
to take your father’s life. You worship him. That’s why he wants to be doubly
sure that you don’t get the Crown.”

“But why?”

“The Chief Minister thinks you are short tempered and immature. He thinks that
you are an atheist, or at least a person who does not have enough devotion. He
has a long range plan. He wants your brother to ascend the Chozha throne. And
then he will convert him to Vaishnavism. Very soon Vaishnavism will become
the religion of the State. That’s his ambition. But when your brother went
missing on the high seas all his plans were spoiled.”

“But why should all of them prevent me from coming to Kadambur?”

“I am the only one who knows what’s in their minds. They may be afraid that I
might tell you everything.”

“How do you know their minds?”

“Your Majesty has forgotten the fact that I happen to be the sister of that
Vaishnavite fanatic Azhwarkkadian.”

“Are you really his blood sister? Do you want me to believe that story?”

“I never believed that story myself. I don’t want you to believe that either. I grew
up in his father’s house. That’s why he calls me his sister. He used to say that I
am an incarnation of Andal, one of the twelve Azhwars. He wants me to go with
him from place to place singing the compositions of Azhwars and spread
Vaishnavism.”

“Did he want to make you a Vaishnavite Nun like there are nuns in Buddhism?”

“No, it’s worse. He wanted to marry me. And wanted to travel around as a
couple singing devotional songs. He also wanted me to bear many children for
him all with a view to propagate Vaishnavism.”

“Oh My God! Where is that monkey-face Thirumalai and where are you? Did he

really want to marry you?”

“That’s my bad luck, Prince. Perhaps I was born at an inauspicious time. Any
man who comes near me does so only with a lustful motive.”

“Why do you want to accuse all men simply because of what the old man
Pazhuvettaraiyar did to you?”

“Lord, I beg you; please don’t talk ill of Pazhuvettaraiyar in my presence. He fell
in love with me. And he married me. It was a lawful wedding. He made an
orphan girl his Queen. He made me live in a palace and enjoy the royal
privileges.”

“But what do you want, Nandini? Do you really love him? Have you really
accepted him as your husband? Then. .. . then... ”

“No! I am deeply indebted to him. That’s all. It’s just gratitude and nothing
more. We are not living as man and wife. Prince, you should understand that I
was born in a poor family and was abandoned by my parents. I gave my heart
only to one man. I will never take it back or give it to another.”

“Who is that lucky fellow, Nandini? No, you need not answer that question. But
answer this - who are you? If you are not my father’s daughter, if you are not my
sister, and if you are not Azhwarkkadian’s sister, then who are you? I’ll be
grateful if you just answer this question, Nandini. Please. If I don’t know the
answer to that question I am afraid I’ll lose my mind.”

“I am dying to tell you, Prince. But see your friend and my friend have come
very near. I’ll tell you when we meet next.”

Nandini spoke to Vandhiya Thevan who had reached them:

“What is this? Your hands are empty? What happened to the leopard’s head?”

“Devi, I am not fortunate enough to place the head of leopard at your feet.”

“Is this valour? You used to sing songs about your ancestors. You used to sing
that your forefathers planted the heads of the Three Great Kings, the Cheras,
Chozhas and Pandyas on the field instead of paddy saplings.”

“What is that song?” - The Crown Prince was curious.

“Are you going to speak or shall I do it for you?” - There was sarcasm in
Nandini’s voice.

“Devi, I don’t remember telling you about such a song.”
“You have forgotten. But I have not. Listen.
Making the fallen army a natural manure
With their flowing blood doing the function of water
In the field of dirt ploughed by the elephant

The Vaana King, the best of Royal blood
Planted the heads of the three emperors
The Cheras, the Chozhas and the Pandyas.
Nandini was in a devastating mood at that time.

“My Lord, how is the song? You beheaded just the Pandya King. But this man’s
ancestors plucked the heads of all the three emperors and planted them in their
field as if they were saplings.”

Nandini succeeded eminently in her mission for there was fury and disgust on
the face of the Crown Prince.

“ Great planting! Great farming! ” And then he broke out into a loud laugh more
to hide his disgust.

Vandhiya Thevan did not have the courage to face his employer. He had to take
enormous efforts to steady himself

He spoke to Nandini in a hesitant voice:

“Devi, I have never talked about that song to you.”

“So what? If you don’t know about the glory of your ancestors it’s time to learn.
Having come from a clan which used the heads of emperors as saplings in a

farm you can’t bring the head of a wounded leopard. Shame on you!”

“What can I do, Devi? The wounded leopard is dead. I don’t want to behead a
dead leopard.”

“How did that happen? I saw the beast slowly getting into the boat.” The Prince
was surprised.

“It was I who showed that to you, my Lord. It got into the boat, lay down and
then died peacefully. Perhaps it would have felt guilty that it had hurt the Junior
Queen of Pazhuvur.”

The Crown Prince cooled down.

“It could have died in water. Why did it get into the boat?”

“Perhaps, it’s also like me, Your Highness. Afraid of water. Of all the ways of
dying I dread dying in water.”

“But a short while ago you jumped courageously into water? Perhaps you have
so much of compassion for this silly girl.” Nandini was not yet finished.

“Devi, honestly, I am more afraid of women than water. I jumped in because the
Prince ordered me to do so. Only now do I realise that I need not have jumped at
all.”

“Yes, yes. Now I remember. You are afraid of falling in water. You are never
afraid of pushing somebody into water and drowning them.”

Nandini was cleverly alluding to the drowning accident involving
Arulmozhivarman.

Manimekalai did not like the way the conversation went. And that clearly
showed in her face.

“Akka, the food is getting cold. Come let’s go.”

All the four started to walk towards the Mandapam. Manimekalai stole a few
glances at Vandhiya Thevan. She knew intuitively that Vandhiya Thevan was in
trouble and that the Prince and Nandini were somehow the reason for it.

“Let the whole world oppose you. I’ll be on your side, my dear. Don’t ever
worry.”

She wanted to tell these words through her eyes if only Vandhiya Thevan looked
at her. But Vandhiya Thevan did not look at her even once. He was lost in his
own world of grief.

Nandini’s treacherous words, the great charge she levelled on Vandhiya Thevan
must have shocked and repulsed any sensitive being. That is quite natural. But if
anyone cares to know a little more about her he would not be shocked.

The qualities of a man or woman largely depend on heredity. They are also
greatly influenced by habits and circumstances. Mandhakini, a dumb and deaf
woman, lived mostly in the forests. She had to be extremely careful for she was
virtually living with the wild animals. At times she had to mercilessly kill those
animals to save her life.

Her mind was as pure as the milk for a long time. And then the sweet elixir of
love was added to that milk when she met her first and only love in her life,
Sundara Chozhan. But soon the fountain of love went dry and her life became as
dry as a desert. She was disappointed when Destiny played a cruel game in her
life. The shock was so much for her that at one point of time she almost lost her
sanity.

But as time passed on, the wounds in her heart healed. Love came into her life
for the second time. The enormous love she had for Sundara Chozhan soon
evolved into a motherly love for his son, Arulmozhivarman.

Nandini was Mandhakini’s daughter. She inherited almost all the traits of her
mother. But the world was even harsher to the daughter than the mother. Nandini
was abandoned at birth by her mother. She grew up in a stranger’s house. She
suffered more from human beings than her mother, from the wild animals of the
forest. When she was insulted and ridiculed by the children of the Royal family,
her heart hardened. All her ill-feelings crystallized into hatred - harder than a
rock and more lethal than the world’s deadliest poison. If only she had had some
love in her life the hatred in her mind would have been to that extent diluted. She
never had it.

Whosoever loved her either ignored and insulted her or died all of a sudden and
vanished from her life.

Those who insulted her and those who were hated by her lived a glorious life.
What else is needed to make a girl’s mind turn into poison? The only feeling that
filled up her mind was a thirst for revenge against those who hated and insulted
her. She had a natural ability to scheme - something she had even when she was
in her mother’s womb.

Her life was full of disappointments and grief thanks to which all soft feelings
had died an early and inglorious death in her heart. And her heart was as hard as
the galvanised steel. Without understanding Nandini’s mind it is almost
impossible to follow the story line.

The four people had their lunch in relative silence. It was a kind of picnic lunch
and a happy conversation should have accompanied it. But it did not. Nandini,
Karikalan and Vandhiya Thevan were lost in their own personal thoughts and
grief. Manimekalai was the one who suffered the most. She loved Nandini. And
she had made elaborate arrangements for the picnic and the lunch only to spend
some happy time with the Pazhuvur Queen and play some water-games with her.
When the Prince and Vandhiya Thevan unexpectedly joined the party at first she
was excited. But then she was put off by the way the three people talked and
behaved with respect to one another.

Manimekalai was gifted with the mind of an innocent child. She soon forgot
seeing Vandhiya Thevan holding Nandini in his hand. She even regretted the
momentary feelings of jealousy that passed her mind when she saw them
together.

But she could never understand the not so happy conversation among those three
people and the frown in their faces. She did not understand their conversation let
alone like it.

A few minutes after lunch Manimekalai spoke to Nandini in a listless voice:

“Akka, shall we go back? Shall I ask the boat to be brought in? Are these people
coming with us?”

Karikalan was shaken from his reverie.

“Aha! How can we go back without listening to this girl’s music concert? Never.
Nandini, have you forgotten or what? Manimekalai, we have been waiting to
listen to you. Please don’t disappoint us.”

Nandini spoke for both.

“No, Prince, I have not forgotten that. But you and your friend do not seem to be
in a mood to enjoy music. You look as if you are standing on a sharp thorn and
in a hurry to go. It’s all right. Manimekalai, please bring your Yazh.”

“Why should I Akka? Why do you force me to play music before those who do
not like it?”

“No, no! Didn’t you hear the Prince? He is eager to listen to your performance.
And if his friend doesn’t like music let him close his ears.”

“Oh My God! I don’t hate music. A boat-woman by name Poonkuzhali sang a
beautiful song. I become ecstatic when I think of that song:

When the sea is still and so is the wave
Why should the inner sea rant and rave
When the earth-maid is asleep
Why should the heart be restless and weep”

“Some people prefer to hear the songs sung by a chosen few. I am not sure
whether you’ll like mine.”

Karikalan pacified her.

“I’ll make him listen to your music, Manimekalai. I stand guarantee for Vandhya
Thevan. Now be a good girl and bring your Yazh.”

Manimekalai obeyed. She sat on the top step of the Mandapam. She tightened
the strings in the instrument and set the harmony. The instrument had seven
strings. Each string could play two notes. For a while Manimekalai played the
stringed instrument and filled the place with melodious music. Music in a way
was a kind of powerful magic for within a few seconds Karikalan and Vandhya
Thevan forgot all their problems. For a while there was nothing in their hearts
except Manimekalai’s music.

And then Manimekalai sang. At first she confined herself only to some
devotional numbers especially the compositions of Saivite saints like

Thirunavukkarasar and Sundara Murthi Nayanar. The Prince then expressed his
desire:

“Manimekalai your songs are out of the world. But why do you confine yourself
to just devotional numbers? You know very well I am not into too much of
devotion and spirituality. Whatever devotion to Lord Shiva I had I have given up
in favour of my uncle Madhuranthakan. Why don’t you sing a love song for
me?”

Manimekalai’s beautiful cheeks turned blood red. She was a little hesitant. The
Prince tried his best to assuage her feelings.

“Why do you hesitate, girl? Well, if you sing a love song, I won’t think that you
have me in your mind. Nor my friend here will have such wrong notions. So
please go ahead and sing, Manimekalai.”

Nandini was quick to intervene.

“Even if somebody thinks that she sings only for him, Manimekalai would not
bother.”

“Akka! Why are you teasing me in the presence of these men?”

“The mistake is not in me, Manimekalai. It’s in your thinking. You think that
these two people are men. That is fundamentally wrong. How can you consider
somebody who cannot even bring the head of a dead leopard as a man? In the

good old days the warriors of Tamilnadu used to catch a tiger alive, open its
mouth, extricate its teeth and make it as a jewel for their beloved. Those days are
all gone. Let’s not worry about that now. You sing, Manimekalai. You sang a
song to me the other day. That was beautiful. Why don’t you sing that song for
these people?”

Manimekalai played the Yazh and sang simultaneously. When she sang of love
there was an additional dose of sweetness in her voice. The rendering was very
soft but very touching.

Is that all a dream, my friend
The time we spent together
On the slopes of the mountain
Besides the waterfalls
Beneath the shadow of fruit-laden trees
When he held my hand
And we were both lost in happiness
Is that all a dream, my friend
Or just a thought in my mind
In the grove of punnai trees
Under the golden rays of the evening sun
He called me near
And whispered words of love
In my ears

Is that all a dream my friend
Is that miracle nothing but a lie?
Defying all security
Like a thief he walked in stealth
And with boundless love
Held me in embrace
And smothered me with kisses
Did it happen?
Weren’t we happy?
Is that all a dream, my friend
Or just a thought in my mind

Several stanzas followed, each set to a different tune. All the three were drowned
in that sublime music. Nandini had made her heart harder than a rock due to
various reasons that were peculiar to her life. Even she was shedding tears,
thanks to the power of music and the emotion in Manimekalai’s voice.

The Crown Prince forgot this world. Vandhiya Thevan looked at Manimekalai
every now and then as if he just recovered from a shock. And every time he saw
her he found that she was looking at him with all the love in the world. Vandhiya
Thevan was in for a greater shock. “Oh My God! I have wronged this angel. I
have made her think that I am in love with her.” His mind was filled with
remorse.

Being submerged in the world of music and emotions they did not notice that the

wind was becoming stronger and stronger. They did not see the small wavelets in
the lake had grown into large waves. They did not notice that the breeze had
become a wind and the wind had become a storm. Only when a huge tree was
uprooted by the force of wind did they wake up to reality. They saw all the signs
of a storm. They saw the noisy waves hitting the shore.

Nandini was the first to notice that.

“Oh My God! Where is our boat?” She virtually screamed. The boat was not in
its usual resting place. When they looked far into the lake they could see the
small figure of the boat being tossed away in water. It was moving deeper and
deeper into water.

“Aiyoo! What can we do now? We are stranded.” Nandini screamed again.

“If you ladies know horse riding please take our horses. We’ll manage.”

“Are you planning to have us killed, being caught under the huge trees which
might fall in this gale?”

Karikalan was not affected.

“There is no need to go now. Let us remain here till the storm subsides. What are
we going to do at the Palace? See we have enough food. At least we have the
materials and utensils. Manimekalai is there to entertain us with her songs. I
have never been this happy in the recent past.”

Vandhiya Thevan was concerned.

“That’s not proper, Your Highness. What will Sambuvaraiyar and
Kandhanmaran think of us?”

“I suspect this man should have let loose the boat in the pretext of looking out
for the leopard r.”

“Akka, why do you blame him? Even when he came here I saw the boat near the
shore. Let us not worry, Akka. My father, when he sees the storm, will send a
boat to rescue us.”

Soon her words became true. A few minutes later two large boats, which from a
distance looked like ships, came towards the island. Sambuvaraiyar was in one
of them. He was happy to see all the four safe and happy. They boarded the boat.

The lake resembled an ocean in turbulence. A greater storm was raging in the
minds of all the four who were rescued. Sambuvaraiyar was the only one who
remained calm.

***

