Ponniyin Selvan
Book 1: Fresh Floods
Kalki R Krishnamurthy
Translated into English by Pavithra Srinivasan
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 1

Auspicious Aadi
We ask our amiable readers to kindly disregard the present, and climb into
the boat of imagination, that we may take a little journey across time,
unmarred by beginnings and endings. We shall cross a century in a
convenient second, and reach a year roughly nine hundred and eighty two
years before our time.* (*Written in 1950.)
Between the hoary lands of Thondai Nadu and Chozha Nadu is placed the
kingdom of Thirumunaippaadi; in its southern regions, roughly two
kaadhams west of the famed Chidambaram Temple lies the huge, sprawling
Veera Narayanan Lake, as large as an ocean. It measures something like
one-and-a-half kaadhams from north to south, and half a kaadham from
east to west. These days, it is known no longer by its full, original name, but
by a much shortened, colloquial version—Veeranathu Eri, or Lake.
Those who saw this massive lake during the months of Aadi and Aavani,
when the floods brought fresh water into it, its surface churning and tossing,
almost overflowing its banks, could not help but marvel in astonishment
and heave sighs of delight at the great feats accomplished by their
ancestors, in ancient Thamizhagam. For, such deeds were not merely for
their own advancement, or even the betterment of those of their times, were
they? Their benefit went down, from generation to generation, like the
munificent plantain trees bequeathing their resources to their young,
enriching many generations a thousand years into the future, didn't they?
On the auspicious, eighteenth day of Aadi, sometime in the early evening, a
young man rode his horse along the banks of the Veera Narayana Eri,
almost ocean-like in its vastness. A descendent of one of Thamizhagam's
most distinguished clans, the Vaanar dynasty, was our young man; by name,
Vallavarayan Vandhiyathevan.

They had travelled a great distance without pause; his horse was weary and
stumbled slowly, along the path. Not that our young traveller was much
distressed by this fact—he was too fascinated by the lake and its enormous
proportions to set much store by his horse's fatigue.
Aadi Perukku was traditionally important for more than one reason—on this
day, every river in Chozha Nadu overflowed its banks; consequently, every
lake that fed from the rivers was filled to the brim as well, the waters
tossing and churning the surface. The river known as Vada Kaveri by
devotees and Kollidam, colloquially, fed straight into the Veera Narayanan
Eri through the Vadavaaru—and the lake was more an ocean, in
dimensions. Water gushed through the seventy-four canals that ringed the
lake, bubbling and foaming, adding to the vast expanse, and irrigating vast
swathes of the surrounding land.
Agriculture was the mainstay here; farmers were engaged in ploughing,
seeding and planting in their respective fields, as the lake's waters flowed
into their lands. Men and women, neck-deep in their work went about with
sweet songs on their lips, to alleviate the burden of labour.
Vandhiyathevan chose to linger on his way, listening to their songs; besides,
he was engaged in another, more important task: he was consumed with the
important task of verifying whether the lake did possess seventy-four
canals, as he'd heard tell. Thus far, he had travelled one-and-a-half
kaadhams—and counted only around seventy.
It was then that the true magnitude, the sheer vastness of the lake burst upon
him, in all its glory. Ha—such length, and breadth! How enormous it was,
seemingly endless—why, even the so-called large lakes, dug by the Pallava
Emperors were nothing but tiny ponds, in comparison! And then, consider
the incredible foresight of Prince Rajadithya, son of Madurai's conqueror,
the illustrious Paranthaka, who had conceived the plan of diverting the Vada
Kaveri's vast waters into a lake of such proportions! Indeed, who could
claim to be his equal, when it came to sheer foresight, and execution of
plans? For that matter, there was no one who could match his courage and
valour, either. Wasn't he the warrior who had chosen to lead his armies in
person, in the battle at Thakkolam? Hadn't he borne an enemy's spear in his
chest as he rode his war-elephant, and ascended to heaven as a valiant

soldier? Didn't he fully deserve the title “He Who Embraced Death on His
Elephant,” as a result of his great deeds?
In truth, these Chozha kings were a strange and wonderful breed. They
were as outstanding in public service as they were in war; as committed to
serving the people, as they were in their devotion to God. And he had
actually had the great good fortune of mingling with, nay, claiming
friendship with them! Vandhiyathevan's shoulders swelled with pride. The
surface of the Veera Narayana Lake heaved and tossed, striking the banks,
whipped by the brisk west wind; Vandhiyathevan's heart flailed as well,
buffeted by waves of sheer pleasure.
By the time Vandhiyathevan reached this point in his ruminations, he had
arrived at the southern end of the lake, and saw the magnificent sight of
Vadavaaru emptying itself into it. The lake bed extended for a small stretch
between the banks and the water's surface; thorny karuvela and vila trees
had been planted in it to prevent damages to the shore from floods. Sturdy
naanal bushes clustered thickly at the edges. In all, the sight of the
Vadavaaru, with water rushing between tree-laden banks and emptying with
a roar into the Veera Narayana Lake made a very pretty, colourful picture
indeed, from afar.
Vandhiyathevan was delighted with nature's painting—but there were a few
other sights too, that considerably increased his admiration, and joy in his
surroundings.
The auspicious day meant that villagers from in and around the lake were in
the mood for celebrations—and scores of men, women, children and even a
few aged ones took advantage of the festive occasion, dressed in their best
clothes and finery, dragging along sapparams made of delicate, ivory-white
coconut fronds. Women wore fragrant blossoms of jasmine, mullai,
thaazhambu, sevvandhi, iruvatchi and shenbagam, spreading their sweet
scent around. Of food, there was plenty as well, in the form of delicious
kootanchoru, a mixture of rice and various condiments. Some strolled along
the banks, having ladled their food into cups fashioned from kamugu; other,
slightly more adventurous sightseers walked right up to where the
Vadavaaru poured into the lake, and ate their food, watching the sight.
Children threw their used kamugu cups into the canals; they watched the
flimsy containers tumble and rush through the choppy waters, and clapped

their hands with glee. Some young men exhibited their playful nature,
pulling off flowers from their beloveds' tresses, threw them into the rushing
waters and laughed to see them tumble out on the other side.
Vallavarayan stayed on the banks for a while, enjoying the sights and
sounds of celebration. He took in the sweet, appealing songs of the women
—they ranged from boat-songs, to kummi, sindhu and even some
celebrating the floods, in all their delightful variety.
“Come, sing in welcome—
The Vadavaaru leaps towards us
Watch, and dance in welcome—
The Vellaaru springs towards us
See, delight and welcome—
The Kaveri rises towards us!”
These and many more songs were sung with joy, celebrating the new
waters, and Vandhiyathevan listened with all his heart, the sweetness in the
tone and verses gladdening his heart.
War-like fervour found favour, among other celebrants in the groups. Some
women enshrined in song, the valour of Vijayalaya Chozha, who sported
ninety and six scars on his battle-worn body, from thirty-two wars; yet
another woman chose to sing about the piety and compassion of his son
Aditya Chozha, who built sixty-four temples for Shiva, all along the course
of the Kaveri, from its birthplace to where it poured into the sea. Paranthaka
Chozha's incredible feats as he subjugated the Pandiyas, Pallavas and
Cheras, won massive victories in Ilankai were sung by a young lady with
enormous zest and vigour. Everyone's performance was listened to with
gratifying attention; sometimes, listeners gave themselves completely to
them, uttering spontaneous exclamations: “Ah! Ah!”
Lost in the revelry, Vandhiyathevan gradually became aware of an old
woman's scrutiny. “You look like you have travelled far and hard, thambi.
You must be very tired. Would you like to get down from that horse of
yours and share some of our nourishing kootanchoru?”
This seemed to be the signal for every young woman in the vicinity to
direct keen glances at our young man. Their laughing eyes settled on him;

they giggled and tittered among themselves, obviously discussing his
appearance.
Vandhiyathevan would have been paralyzed by bashfulness, had not another
part of him been overjoyed at the female attention. He wondered, briefly, if
he should take up the old woman on her offer and gorge himself on some
food—but surely, if he did, those young women would surround him on all
sides and swamp him with their ridicule.
But what of it? Opportunities to be swamped by a bevy of young ladies did
not often come by; even if they did ridicule him, surely the sound of their
teasing laughter would defeat the mellifluous music of celestial beings!
To Vandhiyathevan's besotted young eyes, every young woman on the
shores seemed to be no less a beauty than the divine dancers Rambha and
Menaka, who adorned Indra's court.
Before he could accept the old woman's invitation, though—something else
caught his attention, and made him hesitate.
In the distance, a heavenly sight met his eyes: seven or eight large boats
glided swiftly along the Vadavaaru, from the south-west, their white, silky
sails fluttering in the brisk west wind, oars spread along like the wings of a
graceful swan.
Men and women, indulging in celebration along the banks, gradually fell
silent, their attention riveted by the approaching spectacle.
One among the cavalcade outran the rest, making its way swiftly towards
the northern bend of the lake. Soldiers lined its decks; sunlight caught the
glint of spears and javelins they held, dazzling onlookers. Some of them
jumped on shore and began to drive everyone away with alacrity: “Clear
out! Move away, all of you!”
The celebrants themselves, obviously, did not want to lay themselves open
to such bracing treatment; they were swift to pick up their belongings and
move well away from the banks.
Vandhiyathevan watched the boats and warriors, puzzled. Who were they,
and what sort of passengers did the boats behind them carry? Were they,
perhaps, members of the royal family?

He sidled up to an old man who stood on the banks, leaning on his stick.
“Ayya, who are these men? Whom do those swan-like boats belong to? Why
do these soldiers drive away the people? And why does everyone obey
them?” The questions fairly tripped off his over-eager tongue.
“Why, thambi, do you tell me that you do not recognize them?” the old man
raised his eyebrows. “Do you see the boat in the midst of the rest? And the
flag that flutters in it? Tell me—what is the emblem you see?”
“It seems to be a palm tree.”
“Indeed. And do you not know that it is the emblem of the
Pazhuvettarayars, my lad?”
“Good god,” Vandhiyathevan exclaimed, startled. “Is it truly him? The great
warrior Pazhuvettarayar?”
“It must be. Who else would dare to bear the palm-tree flag with such
authority?”
Vallavarayan's eyes turned towards the approaching boats again, wide with
astonishment. Such were the tales he had heard, about the warrior among
warriors, Pazhuvettarayar. But then, who had not?
Tales of the amazingly valiant Pazhuvettarayar brothers, both Elder and
Younger, had spread through the length and breadth of Chozha Empire,
from Eezham in the South, to Kalinga in the North. The brothers hailed
from the city of Pazhuvoor, on the northern banks of the River Vada Kaveri,
near Uraiyur; their clan had earned a name for valour from the times of
Vijayalaya. The Pazhuvoor family claimed intimate ties with the Chozhas,
through marital alliances; their royal connections and reputation for courage
had made them one of the first families of the land, a clan that was almost,
if not quite, the equal of the ancient Chozha dynasty itself. Such an
illustrious status also meant that they were among the few who could boast
of the privilege of a flag of their own.
Of the siblings, the Elder was more renowned, having made a name for
himself in twenty-four battles; it was commonly held that he had no equal
in Chozha Nadu, when it came to sheer bravery. At the moment, he held a
truly exalted position in the Chozha Empire: that of Treasurer, and Guardian
of Granaries. His was the right to guard the resources of the land, both cash
and kind; his also, was the privilege to assess the demands of the

government, decide on the tax to be levied upon the people, and collect it.
He could march up to any kottam official, affluent landlord or minister, and
demand to be paid whatever tax he levied, that year.
In other words, Pazhuvettarayar was considered next in importance to none
other than Maharaja Sundara Chozha himself, in the Empire.
Naturally, Vandhiyathevan's heart was filled with the unquenchable urge to
catch a glimpse of this supremely important personality, this warrior who
claimed the respect of every Chozha citizen.
But then—he remembered the confidential message entrusted to him by
Prince Aditha Karikalar, in Kanchi's Golden Palace.
“Vandhiyatheva! I'm well aware of your prowess as a warrior. I'm also
aware of your keen intelligence—which is why I'm entrusting this
responsibility to you. Here are two palm-leaves: one is to be delivered to
my father, the Maharaja; the other to my sister, Ilaiya Piratti. I hear such
disturbing tales about even highly-placed officials in the Empire—you
must, therefore, make sure that my message does not fall into their hands.
No matter what position of authority they hold, not a whisper of suspicion
must enter their heads that you carry a message from me. Do not, I repeat,
do not pick fights along the way. It isn't enough if you don't quarrel with
anyone—make sure that your ignore anyone who forces a quarrel on you.
Vallavaraya—I know you to be an excellent warrior, so you may rest easy
about your reputation. Rest assured that ignoring a few disputes isn't going
to be a blemish on your honour.” There was a pause. “In particular, my lad
—you must be very wary of the Pazhuvettarayars, and my uncle
Madhuranthakar. Not on any account must they know the purpose of your
mission!”
Such was the message entrusted to him, not just by the Crown Prince of the
Chozha Empire, but one who held the vastly important position of
Maathanda Nayakar, of the Northern Chozha Forces. Aditha Karikalar had
taken such great pains to impress ways of good conduct and behaviour upon
him, not to mention precise instructions to be carried out, that Vallavarayan
could not find it in himself to ignore those words of caution. Meeting
Pazhuvettarayar, therefore, was a desire he would have to suppress.

Vandhiyathevan heaved a sigh and spurred his horse forward. That noble
animal, already worn down by hard travel, could do little more than ooze
along the path.
Well, that left him with only one option: he would spend the night at the
Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar Palace, and leave the next morning—with a
brand-new horse, able and fit for travel.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 2

Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi
Vandhiyathevan spurred his horse down from the banks, towards a path that
went south.
His heart, at the moment, was as light as a feather, almost tumbling
cartwheels in delight—much like the boats that had skimmed forward so
effortlessly, on the lake's surface. His had always been an optimistic nature,
willing to anticipate pleasure rather than pain. Sheer exhilaration bubbled
up from deep within, coursing through his veins.
Something whispered to him that he was about to embark on a strange and
wonderful journey; that adventures and experiences such as had never
happened to anyone, were about to befall him.
Ah, if he could feel such delight just by stepping into Chozha dominions,
how much more enjoyable would it be, as he journeyed beyond Kollidam?
How alluring would he find those lands, overflowing with natural beauty?
What would the people, especially the women, be like? Such rivers, streams
and delightful, clear ponds! What a magnificent sight would the River
Ponni present, enshrined in countless poems and epics? The river's lush
banks, crowded with Punnai, Konnai and Kadhamba trees, weighed down
with their fragrant blossoms would gladden anyone's heart! Doubtless, he
would be treated to the sight of lotuses and lilies in ponds, enticing him as
they unfurled their delicate petals, their subtle scents wafting towards him
in welcome. Richly carved temples, built by Chozha kings renowned for
their piety would greet him on either side of the river's banks, affording
opportunity for quiet devotion.
Ah, Pazhaiyarai—divine, beautiful Pazhaiyarai! The illustrious Chozha
capital that had wrested pride of place from such Chozha mainstays such as
Poompuhar and Uraiyur. The latter cities were nothing more than

insignificant villages, at the moment. Such temples, mansions, palaces,
wide avenues, soldiers—quarters, magnificently carved stone temples for
Siva and Vinnagara temples for Vishnu as Pazhaiyarai boasted, were never
to be found anywhere else. Vandhiyathevan had heard tales that the simple,
charming Thevaram and Thiruvaimozhi verses, sung with touching devotion
by versatile musicians, were capable of melting even a stone. Now, he
would have an opportunity to listen to such soul-stirring melodies himself.
That was not all: soon, he would have the honour of an audience with one
who was popularly held to be the equal of Manmadha in beauty, and Velan,
for courage: none other than Maharaja Paranthaka Sundara Chozha himself.
Even more important—he would meet his daughter, the much loved and
revered Chozha Princess Kundhavai Piratti as well.
Provided, of course, he met with no danger upon the way.
What if he did, though? He had his spear; his trusty sword hung sheathed, at
his waist; his armour protected his body from injury. Best of all, his heart
possessed enough courage to overthrow any calamity.
But then there were Maathanda Nayakar Aditha Karikalar's instructions to
him as well: they would prove to be a stumbling-block, indeed. He wasn't to
descend to brawling with anyone, no matter what the provocation. Well,
that might prove a difficult proposition. Still, he had managed it thus far, a
considerable distance, hadn't he? Just two days more. Until then, he would
have to keep his temper in check.
It had been Vandhiyathevan's intention to reach Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar's
palace by the time Aadhavan sank in the west; he set a steady pace and
soon, found himself trotting up to the Veera Narayanapura Vinnagara
Temple.
The Aadi festivities meant that the already popular shrine was teeming with
droves of people, filling even the groves surrounding it.
Stalls had erupted in every available corner, selling jack-fruit slices,
bananas, sugarcane cuts, sweet-meats and savouries; others sold flowers
that women loved to adorn themselves with, and lotus buds meant for
divine worship. Some stalls were overflowing heaps of coconuts, ilaneer,
fragrant incense such as akhil, sandalwood paste and other necessities such

as betel-leaves, jaggery and puffed rice; business was brisk. But fun and
frolic had their place as well.
It was not just the vendors who thrived—at certain appropriate corners sat
astrologers, palmistry experts, men who advertised themselves as masters at
reading signs and divining the future, and slick magicians who swore to
remedy any poisonous bite. People milled around all of them, enjoying the
sights and scenes.
So did Vandhiyathevan, as he cruised slowly through the ordered
pandemonium.
At one point, though, the uproar seemed to be at its raucous best. Crowds of
people thronged around, and some voices were so loud that they permeated
even the festivities. Evidently, an argument was going on—and judging by
the heated shouts, a vociferous one.
Every instinct in Vandhiyathevan tugged at him to approach the crowd and
immerse himself in the dispute; he simply could not help himself. He
brought his horse to a halt by the roadside, a little outside the crowd, and
climbed down. Communicating to the horse to stand in its place was a
moment's work; Vandhiyathevan patted the animal, broke through the
heaving crowd at an opportune position, and ploughed through its ranks
with alacrity. What he saw, when he arrived in its midst, made him stop
short in astonishment.
The cause of the enormous arguments and yells that almost reached the
heavens, were just three men.
They might be minuscule in number, but the crowd surrounding them more
than made up for it. Each verbal combatant, it seemed, had his own ardent
following that shrieked its support, whenever he put forth a particularly
brilliant argument—and this, Vandhiyathevan saw, was the real reason for
the clamour.
Once he had taken the time to observe all this, he bent his mind to the
dispute on hand.
One of the three men was almost smothered in sandalwood markings that
denoted the symbol of Thirumaal, or Lord Vishnu, and wore a top-knot at
the front of his head. His short and stocky build proclaimed a hardened
body; he held a staff, as well.

The second was a Siva devotee, adorned liberally with stripes of viboothi,
sacred ash.
The third happened to be clad in saffron and sported a bald head. He, it was
soon understood, was neither a Vaishnavite nor a Saivite, but professed to
be beyond such definitions: one who followed the tenets of the Advaitha
Vedantha philosophy.
“You, Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi, listen to this!” announced the Saivite.
“Haven't we all heard tales of Brahma and Vishnu searching in vain for the
head and feet of Siva Peruman? Didn't they fail spectacularly to bind Him
to such pitiful dimensions, and finally fall at His divine feet, begging
forgiveness for their transgressions? How, in all honesty, can you argue that
Thirumaal is worthier than Siva Peruman?”
This was the sign for Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi to brandish his staff in a
wide arc. “Stop this instant, you who worship the dust at Siva's feet!” he
bellowed. “Your blessed Siva Peruman was the one to rain boons on the
undeserving head of Ilankai's demon-king Ravana—but didn't all those
ridiculous powers come to nothing, before the divine bow of Vishnu's
incarnation, great Rama? How could you possibly argue that Siva is the
more powerful?”
The saffron-clothed Advaitha monk barged in. “Really, I fail to the see the
point of these petty arguments. You may debate the greatness of Siva and
Vishnu over each other until the end of time—but there would be no
purpose to it. The only truth, the greatest of them all, lies in Vedantha. You,
who still prostrate yourselves at the feet of deities like Siva and Vishnu, are
doomed to follow the paltry Bhakthi Margam; you are too ignorant to
understand that the spiritual path, Gnana Margam lies above it; and the
Gnyasa Margam, even more so. Once you arrive at this point, you will
realize that there is no such thing as Siva or Vishnu; everything is
Brahmam, the cosmic consciousness. Sarvam Brahma Mayam Jagath. I
should like to elaborate here, on the excellent essay in the Brahma Sutra
Bhashyam written by Sankara Bhagavadpatha, wherein he quotes—”
“Cease your ridiculous drivel!” yelled Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi. “Do you
even remember what your sacred Sankarachariyar did, after scribbling
endless essays and commentaries on the Upanishads, Bhagavad Geetha and
Brahma Sutra? Listen to this:

Baja Govindham, Baja Govindham
Baja Govindham, Moodamadhe!”
Hear that? He's instructing mindless idiots like you to chant the name of
Govindha and redeem yourselves, that's what he says!” And the crowd
erupted into jeers, laughter and scornful exclamations.
This comprehensively rude argument did not seem to have any effect on the
sanyasi. “Indeed, I have lost my mind, you top-knotted idiot! All you do is
brandish your ridiculous staff in my face—and I truly have abandoned my
senses to even stand here, arguing with the likes of you! I am, in fact, a
moodamadhi!”
“Oy, I may have just a simple staff in my hands, you saffron-robed hermit,
but it has its uses—breaking the heads of the likes of you!” And
Azhwarkkadiyaan raised his staff, as though about to bring it down on the
monk's unsuspecting skull—which sent the crowd into wild paroxysms of
delight.
The monk, it seemed, was unfazed by such an unbridled enthusiasm to bash
his brains in. “My man, kindly rein your enthusiasm and keep a hold on
your staff. I am disinclined to take offence, even if you do wreak havoc on
my head with it. Nothing you do or say will make me angry. I shall not
descend to your level and abuse you either. That which strikes me is
Brahmam; that which bears the strike is Brahmam as well. If you do break
my head, you would only be injuring yourself!”
“Hear, hear, my dear friends,” crowed Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi. “The
sacred staff will now descend upon Brahmam's head, duly wielded by the
supreme Brahmam itself. I'm going to bash myself up!” And he stalked
towards the Vedantha monk.
Vandhiyathevan, watching the altercation, felt an overwhelming desire to
wrench the staff from the excitable Nambi and deal him a few well-placed,
sacred blows upon his revered person, himself.
But stay—the monk was nowhere to be found! He had taken advantage of
the the Nambi's antics, the general distraction, and made his swift escape
through the crowd.
Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi's devout supporters roared in approval.

It was now the turn of the Veera Saiva Pathadhooli Battar, to face the
Vaishnavite's ire. “Well, my beloved Siva devotee, what say you? Prepared
to go head to head with me in an argument? Or would you prefer to make a
speedy escape, like our friend the monk?”
“Ha, certainly not! I, unlike that verbose idiot-monk, am no coward. Or,
perhaps you thought I might ape your blessed Kannan, stealing ghee and
curds from the homes of the Gopis, getting beaten up with churners and—”
Azhwarkkadiyaan butted in, before he could finish. “And your Siva was
utterly without blemish, I suppose? Who was the man who played around
instead of carrying earth to build a bund for River Vaigai, and got caned for
it?” And Azhwarkkadiyaan advanced upon the Saivite, brandishing his staff
once again.
It must be mentioned here that while the Nambi was a stout fellow,
muscular in build, the Pathadhooli Battar was made along thinner lines.
This seemed to be the sign for the surrounding crowd to promptly gird their
loins and prepare for all-out battle, in support of their respective idols.
For some reason, Vandhiyathevan felt an instinct to end this ridiculous bout,
and stepped forward.
“Why do you fight amongst yourselves over such silly things?” He said, in
his clear voice. “Don't you have anything better to do? If battle is what you
want, Eezham is in the midst of war and has plenty of opportunities to test
your mettle. Couldn't you take yourselves there and fight to your hearts'
content?”
Nambi turned to him in an instant. “Who's the man who dares to teach us
our business?”
The crowd was now inspecting Vandhiyathevan. His bearing, which
suggested valor and a certain nonchalance appealed to them—not to
mention his open, handsome countenance.
“You are very right, thambi—do teach these quarrelling men a lesson,” they
offered. “We will support you!”
“I shall tell you whatever I know, about such things,” Vandhiyathevan
elaborated. “It doesn't seem to me that Siva Peruman or Narayanan are
fighting amongst themselves; from what I can see, they're on very friendly

terms with each other. Why, then, must this Nambi and Battar try and break
each other's heads over them?”
This very reasonable explanation drew a round of laughter from the crowd.
“You seem sensible, at any rate,” acknowledged the Battar. “But charming
speeches will not serve to end this argument, you know. Tell me, young
man, who is the greater god: Siva Peruman, or Thirumaal?”
“Both,” was Vallavarayan's reply. “They're equals, and everyone is free to
worship whomever they please. Why must we fight over them?”
“How dare you?” bristled Azhwarkkadiyaan. “What's the proof that they're
equals, eh?”
“You want proof? Well, that I can offer in plenty. You see, I was a guest to
Vishnu's divine abode Vaikuntham yesterday, and whom should I see there
but Siva Peruman, who was there on a visit! They seemed to be on the
friendliest terms. I saw them seated on similar thrones, side by side, and
their height was exactly the same. Still, I didn't want to entertain any doubts
and decided to verify it myself. I used my arm as a measure—”
“Boy—how dare you make a mockery of us!” Azhwarkkadiyaan fairly
growled.
“Go on thambi, go on!” cheered the crowd enthusiastically.
“—and found that my measurements were accurate; they were of the same
height. But I didn't stop there, and decided to clarify the issue once and for
all, and asked them, which of you is the greatest? Do you know what they
said?
“Sivan and Vishnu are like as peas in a pod,
If anyone disbelieves this,
Fill their silly mouths with mud!”
They didn't stop with that. If anyone was stupid enough to still fight over
them, they gave me this, and ordered me to throw it in their mouths!”
Vandhiyathevan opened his right fist. In it was a handful of earth—which
he flung at out.
The crowd went into frenzy at once: people began to scoop up handfuls of
mud and fling it at the Nambi and the Battar. Some tried to prevent them

from descending to such vulgar antics.
“Ha, scoundrels! Unbelievers!” shouted Azhwarkkadiyaan, ploughing into
the crowds. “Infidels!”
The scene seemed ripe for a full-fledged riot—but something occurred,
thankfully, to put a stop to the mayhem.
“Make way! Make way!” announced a voice in stentorian tones. “Warrior
among Warriors, the Most Valiant Udaiyar who broke the ranks of Pandiyas
and beheaded Maara Pandiyan; He Who Sports Sixty-four Scars from
Twenty-four Battlefields; the Treasurer of the Chozha Empire and the
Guardian of their Granaries; the Lord Who Levies Taxes; the Most
Illustrious and Noble Periya Pazhuvettarayar comes among us! Parak!
Parak! Make way!”
Once the kattiyakkaran's thunderous voice died away, the sounds of a
murasu took over, its loud beats echoing around, followed by those who
bore the Pazhuvoor standards, carrying the palm-tree flag. Warriors bearing
spears marched upon the heels of these men.
And finally, in the wake of such pomp and glory appeared the warrior
himself; a dark man, proud of bearing and majesty in every glance, seated
atop a richly decorated elephant. It was a sight for sore eyes, akin to a dark
cloud nestling atop a craggy, jagged cliff.
The jostling crowd parted obediently on both sides, to let him pass;
Vandhiyathevan followed suit, craning his neck to catch a glimpse of the
warrior. There was no doubt that it was Periya Pazhuvettarayar himself.
A palanquin, covered with silk—screens followed upon the heels of the
elephant. Vandhiyathevan felt a prick of curiosity about its occupant—but
before he went any further, two things happened.
A slender hand, tinted a delicate shade of ivory appeared from within the
palanquin. It pushed away the silk-screen slightly, bangles clinking
melodiously.
A dazzlingly beautiful young woman's face appeared from behind the
screen— with the radiance of a pearly-white moon from behind a dark,
rain-laden cloud.

Now Vandhiyathevan was not, in the usual way, averse to womenfolk, or
impervious to the charms of a pretty face. The opposite in fact, was true.
The lady he saw possessed a brilliant complexion and sculpted features; she
shone like a golden, full moon, in the velvety night sky.
And yet Vandhiyathevan's heart did not leap for joy, at this undoubtedly
ravishing countenance. Instead, he was conscious of a vague fear; an
indefinable disgust.
The lady's eyes alighted on something by his side; her eyes narrowed as she
stared hard. The next instant, a horrifying Screech! Could be heard—and
the palanquin's silk-screen fell back into place.
Vandhiyathevan glanced all around; his instinct warned him that she had
screeched at something she saw, in his vicinity.
It was then that he caught sight of Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi, a little behind
him, leaning against a tamarind tree. The staunch Vaishnavite's face was
almost unrecognizable, distorted with fury and hatred.
Vandhiyathevan stared at him, astonished and somehow, repulsed.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 3

The Vinnagara Temple
They say that life is an unpredictable journey that surprises one at every
turn. Those trivial incidents are often the catalysts to significant, life—
altering events that turn the world upside down.
Such an experience occurred to Vandhiyathevan, at that moment.
He had been staring, slack-jawed, at the Pazhuvettarayar procession as it
wound its way through the crowd; his horse had been standing just a little
further away.
The last of Pazhuvettarayar's cavalcade, marching behind their mates,
caught sight of it. “Adei,” exclaimed one. “Look at that kurudhai!”
“That's a horse, not a mule, dimwit,” corrected another.
An acid comment intercepted them. “Will you two scholars kindly set aside
grammar lessons and find out if that animal is a horse or an ass?”
“Now this is a mission more to my liking,” agreed a third. He promptly set
off towards the steed and attempted to clamber on its back. That intelligent
animal, realizing, instinctively, that the man trying to mount it was not his
master, shook him off. It flounced away, obviously distressed.
“Well, well, would you believe the temper of this one!” chuckled the soldier
who had taken a tumble to the ground. “The mule won't let me mount it. It's
a respectable animal, you see—wants a member of an ancient royal clan for
its master.” He appeared to ponder this deeply. “In that case, no one less
than a prince of the Thanjavur Mutharayar dynasty would do!” he quipped
—and the soldiers around him cackled appreciatively.
There was reason for their derisive laughter: the Mutharayar dynasty of
Thanjavur had been crushed out of existence a hundred years ago; the
Chozha Empire's tiger flag fluttered triumphantly, in its place.

“Who cares what the horse thinks?” put in one. “I'd say that our
Thandavarayan right here is a thousand times better than any descendent of
some long-dead Thanjavur Mutharayars!”
“Thandavaraya, you'd better make sure this animal really is a horse, and not
a false-legged prop, brought for the temple festivities,” mocked another
soldier. “After all, it refused to let you mount, didn't it?”
“An excellent idea,” agreed Thandavarayan, and proceeded to put this to the
test. He approached the horse, and this time, caught its tail—giving it a
vicious twist. That much-afflicted animal decided enough was enough,
kicked its hind legs three or four times, and galloped away.
“Ah, look at it run! It really is a mule, then—how wrong we were!” yelled
the soldiers, carried away by what was, to them, a hilarious sight. They
whistled and screeched “Ui! Ui!” and crashed behind the horse as it
stumbled through the festival crowd.
People milling about tried to get away from the terrified animal, as it
ploughed through them. Most managed to escape, but some were still
caught under its thundering hooves, and suffered injuries. The horse
galloped on, meanwhile, maddened out of its senses.
All of this had happened in moments, before Vandhiyathevan could gather
himself and take any action. Azhwarkkadiyaan, who had caught sight of the
young man's expression, guessed that the horse was his.
“Saw the antics of those Pazhuvoor oafs, thambi?” his voice was suave.
“Why couldn't you teach them the lesson you promised me?”
The smoothly delivered taunt found its mark; Vandhiyathevan's face turned
crimson with fury. He grit his teeth, however, and forced himself to keep
calm. The Pazhuvoor men had turned out in full force; there was no point in
trying to take on hundreds of them in a fight. They had not stayed behind to
look for a quarrel with the horse's owner either, marching away after
cackling at it, for a while.
Vandhiyathevan chose, instead, to go after his horse, which had slowed to a
stop after a while. He had not been much worried about his steed; it was
well-trained, he knew, and would not wander away too far. No, what he was
itching to do, was to teach those arrogant Pazhuvoor idiots a lesson—but
now was not the time for it. He would have to wait.

The horse had come to a stop in a tamarind grove, away from the milling
throngs. Sorrow practically dripped off its drooping mien, and it neighed a
little when Vandhiyathevan approached it. Why did you leave me alone,
among those louts? It seemed to ask, and Vandhiyathevan applied himself
to the task of soothing its lacerated nerves. He patted its back, and managed
to calm it down enough to walk it back to the thoroughfare. The crowd
caught sight of him, and impaled him with criticism. “Why did you bring
this unruly animal to the festivities, boy?” they complained. “Look at the
number of innocent people who have suffered its kicks!”
Others were slightly more charitable. “Not the poor boy's fault at all. What
could he do? What could the horse do, for that matter? It was just the mad
work of those Pazhuvoor men and their vulgar antics.”
Azhwarkkadiyaan stood waiting as Vandhiyathevan returned with the horse,
and the young man's face narrowed with irritation. Why won't this
quarrelling idiot leave me alone?
“What's your direction, thambi?” asked the Vaishnavite.
“Er—ah—well, I fully intend to travel to the west, and then turn south, and
then, perhaps, take a stroll to the east and double back to the south-west,”
Vandhiyathevan rattled off.
“That wasn't what I meant. Where do you intend to stay, tonight?”
“Why do you wish to know?”
“If you were, perhaps, intending to stay at the Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar
Palace tonight, I have a commission for you.”
“Well! Are you an expert in the black arts or magic? How on earth did you
know where I was headed?”
“Hardly something that warrants the expertise of a magician. Dozens of
visitors will arrive today from all over the country, and stay at the palace.”
“Is that so?” murmured Vandhiyathevan, surprise colouring his voice.
“Indeed. Don't tell me you didn't know this—who else could the palanquin,
royal umbrellas, elephants, horses, drums conches and trumpets belong to,
but the Kadambur royal family? They were here to welcome

Pazhuvettarayar and escort him to the palace. He would expect, and settle
for nothing less.”
This was news indeed. Opportunities to stay in the same place as Chozha
Nadu's greatest warrior would not be easy to come by; who knew? He
might even chance upon a god-given excuse to actually meet him, and
introduce himself, perhaps. All this was highly tempting—but recent
experience with Pazhuvettarayar's brutes had soured his expectations, a
little.
Lost in reverie, Vandhiyathevan came to himself at Azhwarkkadiyaan's
voice.
“Thambi—will you do me a favour?” Azhwarkkadiyaan's tone was filled
with pleading.
“What sort of favour could I offer you? I'm a stranger to these parts,
myself.”
“I wouldn't ask you anything beyond your means. Take me to the Kadambur
Palace with you, tonight.”
“Whatever for? Do you expect to meet a Saivite, there? Perhaps you're
eager to debate with him about the respective merits of Siva and Thirumaal
over each other?”
“No, of course not. Did you really think I picked quarrels for a living? See,
my lad, the Kadambur palace will resound with celebrations tonight—they
are sure to hold an enormous feast, which will be followed by kaliyaattam,
saamiyattam, a delightful kuravai koothu, dances and songs. I've never seen
a koothu—and this would be a perfect chance.”
“Be that as it may—how would I be able to escort you?”
“You could introduce me as your servant.”
Every suspicion that Vandhiyathevan had entertained some time ago
returned in full force, and grew in strength. “Look—you'd better play off
your petty tricks on someone else. I'm not the man to fall for it. The last
thing I want is someone like you as my servant—and who do you think will
believe such a thing? No one would, even if I were stupid enough to take
you with me. Besides, judging by everything you say—I doubt if even I will
find a place to stay there, tonight.”

“Then—you're not travelling to Kadambur by invitation?”
“I am, in a way. Sambuvaraiyar's son Kandan Maravel is a very dear friend
of mine, and has often insisted that I visit him, if I'm ever in these parts.”
“Is that all? You won't find it an easy circumstance to enter the palace
tonight, then!”
They walked together in silence, for a while.
“Why do you follow me?” asked Vandhiyathevan, finally.
“I could ask you the same thing. Why don't you go your own way?”
“Because I don't know my way around, of course. Nambi, do you go to
Kadambur, as well?”
“No—you've refused to take me along, haven't you? I'm on my way to the
Vinnagara temple.”
“To the Veera Narayana Perumal Temple, you mean?”
“Yes.”
“I would like to visit there, as well.”
“Would you, now? I wondered if you might object to visiting Vishnu
temples. This one has an excellent history, and worthy of worship, as well.
There's a Battar, a priest here, by name Eswara Munigal, who serves at the
temple. A great man, indeed.”
“I've heard of him too—but the temple's so crowded today! Is it an
auspicious occasion?”
“Of course—today is the birth star of the lady Andal, one among the twelve
azhwars, the chief of Thirumaal's devotees. And then, it's Aadi Perukku as
well, which explains the teeming crowds. Hardly surprising, is it?”
Azhwarkkadiyaan changed tack. “Thambi, have you ever listened to any of
Andal's songs?”
“No.”
“Don't. Never, never attempt to listen to them!”
“Why this hatred?”

“I cherish neither hatred nor loathing for her pasurams—all I wanted was to
warn you about their fatal charm. My lad, if you ever had the misfortune of
listening to her exquisite poems, you'd throw away your spear and sword;
swear off your military lifestyle and wander away on a pilgrimage through
all the Vinnagara temples in the land!”
“Do you know any? Can you sing them?”
“A few. I've learnt some of Nammazhwar's divine verses as well. I intend to
sing them at the temple; you may listen, if you wish,” answered Nambi.
“Ah, here we are!”
And, in truth, they had arrived at the Veera Narayanapura Temple.
***
Paranthaka Chozha the First, the grandson of Vijayalaya Chozha, carried
the magnificent title of “The Kopparakesari Who Conquered Madurai and
Eezham” —and it was he who laid the foundations for the Empire, the
Chozha kingdom would later become. Paranthaka was also the bearer of
other, grand titles: he it was, who had fitted Thillai Chitrambalam, or the
Chidambaram temple with a golden roof; in consequence, he possessed the
titles of Chozha Sigamani, Soora Sigamani among others—not to mention
Veera Narayanan, as well.
The Rashtrakuda kings of the Rettai Mandalam kingdom in the North,
wielded considerable power during his time; Paranthaka suspected that they
might cherish designs on the Chozha territories as well and stationed his
firstborn, Prince Rajadithya, in the Thirumunaippaadi country, with a large
army at his disposal.
Rajadithya was loath to let hundreds of thousands of warriors lounge about
with nothing to do, and hit upon a plan: they would do something that
benefited a large swathe of the local population. Well aware that copious
amounts of water overflowed the banks of the Vada Kaveri, or Kollidam
and drained into the sea with no use to anyone, he made arrangements for
his men to dig a massive lake, to collect it. He named it the Veera Narayana
Eri in honour of his beloved father, and raised a Vinnagara Temple, as well
—it was common for Vishnu Temples, or Vishnu Grihas, to be known in
Thamizh as Vinnagaram, in those days.

Thirumaal, or to address Him by another name, Sriman Narayanan Murthy
was the Protector, the Supreme Being who guarded all life as he lay on his
snake-bed, in a sea of milk. It was only appropriate that temples in his name
were often raised on the banks of lakes; this was also the reason for the
presence of the Veera Narayana Temple, on the banks of this one, too.
Azhwarkkadiyaan and Vandhiyathevan entered the sacred precincts of such
a hoary temple; once they approached the sanctum, the Vaishnavite cleared
his voice, and began to sing. He worked through a few of Andal's divine
pasurams, or songs, and finally touched upon Nammazhwar's work,
commonly referred to as the Thamizh Vedham:
“Poliga poliga poliga
Poyitru valluyir chaabam
Naliyum naragamum naindha
Namanukingu yaathonrumillai
Kaliyum kedum kandu kolmin
Kadal vannan boothangal manmel
Maliyap pugundhu isai padi
Aadi uzhi tharak kandom!
Kandom kandom kandom
Kannukkiniyana kandom
Thondeer elleerum vaareer
Thozhuthu thozhuthu ninraarthum
Vandaar thannan thuzhaayaan
Maadhavan boothangal manmel
Pandaan paadi ninraadip
Parandhu thirigindranave!
[Behold, behold, the shining grace of the Lord who redeems us of our
curses; Behold the light that banishes the darkness of hell; that releases us
from the yoke of Death; the Age of Kali is at an end, and those who worship
Lord Vishnu will rise again, upon this earth; sing and dance, to glory!
Behold, behold, the sight that gladdens our hearts; to see the prayers of His

servants rise to reach Him; we, who sing His praises are lost in the ecstasy
of His grace, as bees, drunk on the nectar of His thulasi garland!]
Tears gathered in Azhwarkkadiyaan's eyes, rolling slowly down his cheeks,
as he gave himself up to the beauty of the divine. Vandhiyathevan listened
carefully as well, and though he shed none, his heart melted at the simple
beauty and pure emotions that were their essence.
His sentiments about Azhwarkkadiyaan underwent a change, as well. This
man, he thought, is a true servant of God.
Others, besides the young man, immersed themselves in the songs: the
mudhalimaar, the temple authorities lost themselves in it, as did the priest,
Eswara Battar, who stood by the sanctorum, tears brimming in his eyes. By
him stood a fresh-faced youngster, his attention entirely on the singing
Vaishnavite.
Azhwarkkadiyaan sang ten pasurams with the utmost feeling, and finished
with one more:
“Kalivayal thennan kurugoor
Kaari maaran sadagopan
Oli pugazh aayirathu ippathu
Ullathai maasarukkume!”
[Sing these songs, devout ones, composed by Kari Mara Sadagopan of
Kurugoor in the divine lord's honour—and thy heart will be cleansed of
every blemish!]
When he finished, the youngster leant towards his father, and whispered
something into his ears. The Battar, who had bent down, straightened
himself and wiped his eyes. “Ayya, hasn't the revered Nammazhwar,
Sadagopan of Kurugoor sung a thousand songs in praise of our Lord? Do
you know them all?”
“This servant hasn't had that good fortune,” answered Nambi. “I am
acquainted with a few, though.”
“Pray, teach this youngster of mine whatever you know,” requested the
Battar.
***

Veera Narayanapuram was to be honoured with a great many more
accolades, in the coming years: the young Battar's son who now stands
beside his father, listening to the chaste pasurams of Nammazhwar, his face
a picture of innocence and the radiance of youth, would grow up, one day,
to become Nadamunigal, the first and most illustrious of many Vaishnava
Acharyas; later, he would journey to Kurugoor, also known as Azhwar
Thirunagari, and gather all thousand of Nammazhwar's beautiful verses,
adding even more acclaim to the great devotee who had composed the
Thamizh Vedham. Nadamunigal's many disciples would painstakingly
catalogue these verses, memorize them, and sing them all over the country.
His noble work would not stop there: Nadamunigal's grandson Alavandhar,
would lead a life rich with destiny and far more miraculous events than
even his grandfather.
More praise would pour in: Udayavar Sri Ramanujar himself would visit
this, the birthplace of such greatness, and stare in astonishment at the Veera
Narayanapuram Lake, and its seventy-four gushing canals. He would
ponder upon the endless grace and compassion of Thirumaal, who
showered his blessings upon his devotees, just as the canals that poured
water into the lake. This would lead the saint to conceive of setting up
seventy-four Acharya peedams, or Vaishnava centres for devotees; these
would, one day, lead to the establishment of seventy-four
Simmasanadhipathigal, or Vaishnava leaders, who would dispense
knowledge and grace to devotees, in their turn, and begin a rich tradition
that would continue over centuries.
But such things do not come under the purview of this tale; we shall let the
richly compiled Vaishnava Guru Parambarai tomes to recount their lives,
and return to Vandhiyathevan.
Once they had completed their worship and walked out of the temple,
Vandhiyathevan turned to Azhwarkkadiyaan. “Nambi, I must beg your
forgiveness. I had no idea that you were such a devout man, or that you
were so well learned. You won't hold my ignorant words against me, will
you?”
“By all means, you have my forgiveness, but tell me—will you do me a
favour?”

“I said that I couldn't do what you wanted—and you agreed, didn't you?”
“Ah, but what I wish you to do now is something else altogether. I shall
give you a tiny note. Should you have the opportunity to stay in the
Kadambur Palace tonight, you must deliver it into the hands of a certain
person.”
“Oh? To whom?”
“The woman who followed Pazhuvettarayar, in her closed palanquin.”
“Nambi, what sort of a man do you take me for? Do I really seem like the
kind that delivers notes to women? Had it been anyone but you who asked
this of me—”
“If you're unwilling, thambi, leave, by all means. There's absolutely no need
to fly into a passion. The thing is—if you'd helped me with this, I might
have lent you my assistance at some point. Never mind.”
Vandhiyathevan lingered no more. He leapt on his horse and galloped
towards Kadambur.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 4

The Kadambur Palace
The many minutes of repose seemed to have done Vandhiyathevan's horse
plenty of good; the young man set an excellent pace, and reached the
entrance of Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar's Palace within a naazhigai's time.
Many were the leaders of ancient clans that wielded authority under the
banner of the Chozha royal dynasty; Sengannar Sambuvaraiyar was one
among them. The entrance to his palace rivaled that of a city's massive
fortress gates; the walls that rose along their sides resembled a thick and
unyielding fort-wall, as they wound their way around, on both sides.
The entrance was teeming with activity. Elephants, horses and bulls stood
cheek and jowl, while their trainers jostled for space with those who
brought water for steeds; men who held aloft torches to see by in the fading
light, and those who poured oil for said torches. The place reverberated
with enthusiastic exclamations and celebratory shouts.
Vandhiyathevan paused before entering the clearing, hesitation and a hint of
despondence in his heart. Obviously, he had arrived in the midst of revelry
and this was not, he felt, a circumstance in his favour. And yet, he felt a
keen desire to know the cause for the festivities. The entrance gates did
stand open, but they were guarded by armoured soldiers who held swords
and spears in readiness. To tell the truth, they looked more like demons in
Death's abode, than mere men.
Hesitation would serve no purpose, decided our valiant young man; he
would be sure to be noticed, and stopped at once. No, riding full tilt at the
soldiers and dashing through the entrance was the only way in. To think was
to do, in Vandhiyathevan's book—and he suited words to action.
But ah—what a disappointment! The moment he reached the entrance, two
of the sentries barred his way, crossing their long spears. Four more

grabbed hold of his horse's reins. One of them craned his neck and stared at
Vandhiyathevan; another raised his oil-torch against the young man's face
for better visibility.
“So!” Vandhiyathevan's voice rang with fury. “This is how you treat your
esteemed guests, is it? Is this your idea of hospitality?”
“And who might you be, thambi, with such an unruly tongue in your head?”
queried the sentry.
“You wish to know my name and designation? You may have them!”
bellowed Vandhiyathevan. “Vaanagappadi is my country; I claim
Thiruvallam as my city. Once upon a time, your men took pride in tattooing
my valiant ancestors' names on their chests! I am called Vallavarayan
Vandhiyathevan. Does that satisfy you?”
“How impressive!” exclaimed a guard. “Pray, why not bring along a
kattiyakkaaran to bellow your titles before your arrival?”
The rest of the guards cackled in merriment.
“Whatever your title, you cannot enter the palace precincts at this hour,”
declared the Chief of Guards. “All our expected guests have arrived; our
master has issued orders not allow entrance to anyone else!”
By this time, the altercation at the palace's entrance had attracted some
attention; some of the guards who stood chatting just within the gates
ambled forward to meet the feuding men. One of them directed a keen
glance at the new arrival, and perked up. “Adei, this looks like the mule we
chased away from the temple grounds this evening!”
“Call it an ass, idiot,” supplied a jester.
“Ah, my friends—do but take note of the proud bearing of the noble ass's
owner!” declared another.
Even as Vandhiyathevan listened to these taunts, his mind spun through his
options, swiftly.
Was there even a point in braving these men and entering the palace?
Wouldn't a better purpose be served if he just turned away, at this point?
Perhaps he ought to just pull out Prince Aditha Karikalar's royal insignia
and display it to these idiots. That would certainly shut them up. Who, after

all, would dare to stop a man who bore the insignia of the Commander-inChief of the Northern Chozha Armed Forces? Surely no one from Vada
Pennai to Kumari, the tip of Thamizhagam, would dare to even think of
such a thing!
The last of the Pazhuvoor men's heckling fell on his ears as he thought this
—and he came to a swift decision.
“Let go of the reins—I'm leaving,” he announced, and the soldiers released
him.
Vandhiyathevan pressed his heels into the underbelly of his steed; at that
very instant, he unsheathed his sword with a hiss, from his scabbard. The
flickering lights caught the metal; he swung the weapon with such force and
dexterity that for a moment, he resembled Thirumaal, wielding the divine
discus with supreme confidence.
The sword cut through the air with finesse. Vandhiyathevan's horse sprang
forward, through the gates. Soldiers standing on either side sprawled on the
ground in an ungainly fashion. A dozen spears, supposed to be held in
readiness, clattered to the earth, wholesale.
The Pazhuvoor men stood gaping as the horse bounded forward. A
lightning-fast counter-attack was the last thing on their minds, and when it
seemed likely that their skulls would be broken, they scattered in every
direction.
Other events happened at almost the same time: the fort's enormous gates
banged shut-shouts rang all over the entrance—“Get him! Now!” Metal
bruised metal as spears were picked up; swords were unsheathed, and the
Clang! Clang! of weaponry rang through the courtyard. The palace drums
scented danger and banged their warning through the land: Daddam!
Daddam!
Twenty, thirty, fifty soldiers surrounded Vandhiyathevan and his horse in an
instant; the young man lost no time and jumped down at once.
“Kandamara!” he yelled, brandishing his gleaming sword in a wide arc.
“Kandamara! Your soldiers are murdering me!”
The converging men stopped and fell back, suddenly hesitant.

“Stop this instant!” A stentorian voice thundered above them, from the
upper balconies of the palace. “What is all the commotion down there?” A
few men could be seen where the voice came from, peering down at the
palace entrance.
“Master—a man has just broken through the guards, into the palace
grounds,” explained a soldier from below. “He mentions the name of our
Young Master!”
“Kandamara!” bellowed that stentorian voice, again. “Get down and see
what the uproar is about!” That voice, Vandhiyathevan speculated, probably
belonged to Sengannar Sambuvaraiyar.
He and the men surrounding him stood in place, for the next few minutes.
“What's happening here?”—came a considerably youthful voice. The men
in the vicinity promptly stood back and made way. A young man strode
swiftly through the ranks, and stopped at the extraordinary sight, taken
aback.
Vandhiyathevan stood in the midst of the soldiers, twirling his sword about,
like the valiant lord Subramanya, brandishing his divine weapon.
“Good god, my dear man—is it really you?” And Kandamaran almost ran
forward, folding his arms around Vandhiyathevan in a crushing embrace.
“You've insisted time and again that I visit you, but when I finally do—look
at the hero's welcome I get,” Vandhiyathevan pointed at the men still
surrounding them.
“Thick as posts and just as intelligent,” Kandamaran chided them. “Get lost
you idiots!”
***
Kandamaran lost no time in grasping his friend's hands, and dragging him
through the entrance, into the palace. His feet barely seemed to touch the
ground; his heart fairly danced with enthusiasm as he rushed about, eager to
point out the sights.
Such, after all, is the case when one finds a friend after his own heart, in
one's youth. Oh yes, there was such a thing as romance—but love, even if it
brought ecstasy, also came with its own share of trials, tribulations and

heart-aches. But the friendship of youth—ah, nothing existed then but joy
and happiness; not even the shadow of sorrow intruded upon it.
“By the way, Kandamara,” Vandhiyathevan began, casually, as they raced
along. “I see the palace overflowing with guests and their entourage—what
seems to be the special occasion? Why is this security and guards all over
the place?”
“I'll come to that in a minute, but first—remember our days at the military
encampment on the River Pennai? You'd go on and on about how you
wished to meet Pazhuvettarayar, Mazhavarayar, that warrior, and this one—
now you can see them all, right down to their staff, bodyguards and every
stick and stone they own. Right here, in this palace!” Kandamaran exulted.
The first place he took his friend to, when the first ecstasies of meeting
were done with, was the section of the palace reserved for esteemed
visitors. But before that, came the host.
“Appa, haven't I mentioned often my dearest friend, Vandhiyathevan of the
Vaanar clan? Well, here he is,” announced Kandamaran, standing the young
man in front of his father. Vandhiyathevan, true to his birth and breeding,
bent low and folded his hands in respect.
For some reason, Sambuvaraiyar did not seem very happy with his
presence. “Is that so? Were you the reason for all the mayhem below?”
“No, our so-called soldiers were,” Kandamaran explained.
“Indeed?” Sambuvaraiyar raised an eyebrow. “If you must know,
Kandamara, I see no reason for your friend's arrival half a jaamam after
sunset, today—and in such a chaotic fashion too.”
Kandamaran's face grew pinched, but it was obvious that he did not want to
argue with his father. He took his friend aside, and made haste to present
him to Pazhuvettarayar, seated majestically, in a richly decorated throne in
the midst of them all. “Uncle, here is my dear friend Vandhiyathevan,
descended from the illustrious Vaanar dynasty. We served together on the
borders, in the military encampment on the banks of the River Pennai. It's
been his greatest ambition to meet you, Warrior among Warriors, for long
time. I remember; he'd ask me if you really did sport sixty-four battle-scars
on your body,” laughed Kandamaran. “And I'd often reply, well, if you're
really that doubtful, you could count them yourself!”

“Indeed, thambi?” Pazhuvettarayar looked him up and down. “So, you don't
believe that my scars do exist? Or is it your contention, perhaps, that no
clan but the Vaanars is capable of possessing such courage?”
The friends stared at him, aghast. Neither had intended the words as
anything but extravagant praise—and it had never occurred to them that the
warrior would take offense.
Vandhiyathevan felt irritation burgeoning within him, but quelled it before
his face revealed it. “Ayya, the Pazhuvettarayar's fame has spread through
the length and breadth of our land, from Imayam to the tip of Kumari,” he
said, in his most respectful voice. “Who am I to entertain the slightest
doubts about their valour?”
“Not bad at all,” Pazhuvettarayar acknowledged. “You do possess brains, I
see.”
There was nothing more to be said; Vandhiyathevan and Kandamaran made
their escape, more relieved than they could say. Sambuvaraiyar took his son
aside at the first opportunity. “You had better feed your precious friend and
put him to bed somewhere out of everyone's way,” he whispered. “He is
bound to be exhausted after a long day's travel.”
Maravel nodded roughly, plainly furious.
Later, Kandamaran shepherded his friend to the anthappuram, the ladies'
quarters, where the women of the royal household were assembled in full
force. Vandhiyathevan paid his respects here too, falling at the feet of his
friend's mother, and gaining her blessings. The young woman standing well
behind the older lady, overcome by shyness must have been,
Vandhiyathevan guessed, Kandamaran's sister.
Kandamaran had described his young sister in such glowing terms that she
had, in his over-active imagination, acquired the status of nothing less than
a goddess. Now that he had seen her in person, Vandhiyathevan was
conscious of some disappointment.
His eyes roved over the women present, gazing keenly at them. Which of
them, he wondered, was the woman who had followed Pazhuvettarayar in
her palanquin?

Glossary:
Imayam: The Himalayas.
On Exclamations and Hidden Meanings: The phrases Kalki used to
describe his characters and move the story along are almost as interesting as
the story themselves. He wrote Ponniyin Selvan in the 1950s, which means
that many of the Thamizh phrases he used then are out-of-fashion, today.
Take, for instance, the phrase Kandamaran uses in Thamizh, when he's
telling off his stupid soldiers: “Muttalgala! Ungal arivu ulakkai
kozhundhudhaan!” An ulakkai is a wooden cudgel bound by iron on both
ends to pound grains; there's no chance of it coming alive, or sprouting
leaves. The soldiers' intelligence was much the same —non-existent.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 5

The Kuravai Koothu
The friends had strolled out of the anthappuram, when a feminine voice
reached them. “Kandamara! Kandamara!”
“That is my mother—wait a while here, will you?” and Kandamaran
vanished within the ladies' quarters again. Vandhiyathevan, left to cool his
heels in the corridor, could not help but listen to the muffled sounds of
women throwing a barrage of questions at his friend, who stammered and
stuttered his answers. A burst of tinkling laughter assaulted him, as well.
Perhaps they were laughing at him, Vandhiyathevan wondered, and felt his
face grow hot with shame and anger. But there was no more time to be
wasted on such thoughts; Kandamaran re-appeared that very instant. “Come
on,” he grabbed his friend's hands and dragged him away. “There's a great
deal I must show you!”
While they made a duly thorough inspection of such grand sights as the
Kadambur Palace's moonlit courtyards, dance and music halls, large
granaries, marble terraces, beautifully carved alcoves and balconies, towers,
commemorative plaques, kalasams and royal stables, Vandhiyathevan put
forth his question as nonchalantly as he could. “The ladies seemed to be
very merry, when you left me to answer their questions—were they so very
overjoyed at my arrival?”
“They certainly were happy to see you—my mother and the rest liked you
very well. But you weren't the reason for their laughter”
“Oh? Who was then?”
“You know, don't you, that Pazhuvettarayar has married a young woman
after all these years, at this advanced age? He's brought her here with him in
a closed palanquin—but listen to this: he won't send her to the women's

quarters! He chooses, instead, to keep her locked up in his own apartment.
One of our maids happened to catch sight of her as she peeped into their
rooms through the palagani, and described her in such glowing terms that
no one knows what to make of it. They're now speculating about her birth
and identity—maybe she's from Ilankai, Kalingam or perhaps even the
Chera kingdom! You're aware, I suppose, that the Pazhuvettarayars
originally hail from those parts?”
“Of course; you told me so, yourself,” Vandhiyathevan waved a careless
hand. “Be that as it may—how long has it been since the old man married
this mysterious beauty from who-knows-where?”
“Not more than two years, I should think. Rumour has it that he doesn't
leave her alone for a moment; takes his beloved lady with him wherever he
goes, in a palanquin. People have been trading gossip about his marital
escapades for quite a while now. What else do you expect, when a man of
his age and standing gives in to temptation and stoops to spending all his
hours with a young girl?”
“That's no reason for such widespread talk about old men and their
predilection for young women—shall I tell you the truth about such gossip?
Women, my dear Kandamara, are jealous creatures. I'm not putting down
your family-merely commenting about their nature, in general. Kadambur's
royal ladies are dark-complexioned beauties; Pazhuvettarayar's young wife
is a golden nymph, with skin like a delicately tinted lotus! Hardly
surprising, it is, that they should comment about her in such terms”
“Golden—but how on earth would you know her complexion? Have you
seen her, then? Where, and when? If Pazhuvettarayar ever caught wind of it,
you'd be dead in seconds.”
“You know me, Kandamara—I'm hardly the man to be terrified about such
things. In any case, it wasn't what you think. I was part of the crowd at
Veera Narayanapuram, watching the Pazhuvettarayar cavalcade as it passed
by me. By the way, I did hear that the elephants, horses, palanquins and
everything else were part of your welcoming committee.”
“True enough. What of it?”
“What, indeed? I merely compared his magnificent entry, with mine.”

Kandamaran chuckled appreciatively. “We gave Pazhuvettarayar the
welcome due to the Empire's Treasurer—while you, as an iron-hearted
warrior, deserved something a little more spontaneous, shall we say? If, by
Muruga Peruman's grace, you should happen to become something more—
such as the Kadambur royal family's son-in-law, for instance—you'll find
that your welcome changes entirely!” He paused. “But you were about to
speak of something else, weren't you? How did you ever know that
Pazhuvettarayar's beautiful wife was a golden nymph?”
“Ha, there I was, gaping at Pazhuvettarayar as he passed me by,
majestically seated on his elephant—truth be told, Kandamara, he looked
more like Yamadharman on his terrifying black bull, to me—and lost in
daydreams about how, one day, I should like to ascend to his height. A
closed palanquin followed his elephant. I was wondering about its
occupant, when a slender hand crept out and pushed away its silk-screen a
little, allowing me a glimpse of a golden face. And that was all I saw. From
what you've been telling me now, she would seem to be his young wife.”
“You're a lucky man, my friend. Word is that no man has ever managed to
catch the smallest glimpse of her—but you saw an arm and her face, didn't
you? What country did she seem to be from, did you think?”
“I'll confess that I didn't really bend my mind to it, at that moment. From
what little I saw, though, I wonder if she might be from Kashmir? Or one of
those lands beyond the seas, such as Saavakam, Kadaram, Misiram—or
even Greece? Perhaps she's from the Arab lands? I've heard tales that they
cover their women from head to toe, the moment they're born.”
From far away, the sound of instrumental music fell on their ears. The beats
and notes of Salli, Karadi, Parai, Udukku and a flute blended together, as
they reached the friends.
“What's happening?” asked Vandhiyathevan.
“It looks like the Kuravai Koothu is about to begin—they're playing the
prelude, I think. What's your pleasure? Would you like to watch it? Or
prefer to have your meal and make an early night of it?”
Azhwarkkadiyaan's enthusiastic words about the celebrations at Kadambur,
that night, echoed in Vandhiyathevan's ears. His mind was made up in an

instant. “I've never seen a Kuravai Koothu, Kandamara—I should like to,
now.”
The friends turned a corner in the long corridor—to find the glory of a stage
set for the performance, in front of them. And in truth, they were just in
time: spectators had begun to arrive.
The stage for the Kuravai Koothu was set in the midst of a vast space, a
white-sand strewn courtyard, enclosed on one side by the palace, and the
fort's thick walls on the other. Drawings of roosters and swans were set up
on the stage at appropriate positions; various colourful decorations made of
roasted red rice, beads, fragrant flowers and yellow-painted thinai rice were
sprinkled liberally. Large lamps, or kuthu-vilakkus and oil-torches burnt
bright, in an effort to dispel the encroaching the darkness; but smoke
belched by said torches and the fog-like density of various incenses like
akhil, dimmed the light, producing a dramatic effect. Musicians had seated
themselves in front and by the sides of the stage, and begun their
performance with alacrity.
The thunderous beats, fragrant flowers and aromatic incense wended their
way into Vandhiyathevan's brain and for a moment, the world seemed to
spin.
Once the chief guests arrived, there was no more reason to tarry. Nine
women arrived on the stage, prepared to begin their performance. In
accordance with the Koothu tradition of those times, they wore garments
moulded to their figures, and jewellery that set off their charms to
perfection. Silambu anklets clinked on their feet; their tresses fairly glowed
with red flowers such as kanni, kadamba, kaandhal, kurinji and sevvalari—
all blooms set to gladden Muruga Peruman's heart. In addition to wearing
them, they had woven the flowers into a long garland as well, and
themselves into it. Some held parrots in their hands gracefully, fashioned
from sandalwood and painted in a riot of colours.
They paid their respects to the gathered audience; the Koothu began in
earnest.
The women sang songs in praise of Muruga Peruman, his courage, the
valour that led to confront demons such as Soorapadman and Gajamugan;
the stirring tales of his battles against them; the enormity of the divine

power he wielded that burnt out entire seas and oceans, and his complete
annihilation of evil forces. They spoke of the beauty of his form, his many
attractive charms, his compassion, and of the celestial women who,
themselves the epitome of beauty, yearned for the love of such a warrior; of
Muruga's magnanimity in refusing the hands of such high-born damsels and
journeying to the wild mountains of Thamizhagam, where he wooed and
won the heart of a simple tribal girl, who shooed away birds as she guarded
thinai.
The tales they told; the songs they sang, and their beautifully coordinated
dances, not to mention the steady beats of the parai and the melodious
notes of the flute, set pulses racing, and nerves jangling, in anticipation.
They finished, finally, with the age-old, traditional blessing:
“Pasiyum piniyum pagaiyum azhiga!
Mazhaiyum valamum dhanamum peruga!”
[Woe to Famine, Disease and War! Welcome, welcome, to Rains, Wealth
and Fortune!]
Their departure was the sign for the next, and more important part of the
Koothu to commence: the Velanattam, the dance of Velan. Accordingly, the
principal players, the Devaralan and Devaratti, the male and female
components of the dance, arrived on stage. True to the roles they were to
act, each was dressed in blood-red garments, and twined gloriously red
sevvalari flower garlands around them. Their foreheads were smeared
thickly with red kungumam; their mouths glistened red with the juice of
betel leaves and areca-nuts. Their eyes, when they cast them around the
audience, glowed a bloodthirsty red.
It began, to tell the truth, in a subdued fashion; man and woman danced
away on stage, by themselves, at times; in tandem with each other, hands
inter-woven, at others. As the minutes went by, the crashing beats of
instruments picked up pace—and their dance turned turbulent, reverberating
with emotion. The Devaratti danced to a corner of the stage and picked up a
spear; the Devaralan pranced to her and did his best to wrest the weapon
from her. The Devaratti protested and tried to fend him off; the Devaralan,
after a prolonged effort, finally grew tired of her refusal, and delivered a
might leap that set the stage quaking. He grabbed the spear from his mate,

upon which the Devaratti crept away from the stage, as though trembling in
fear at the sight.
The Devaralan grasped the spear and began to dance; a dance that grew in
frenzy and mad, mad energy by the moment. A dance of annihilation, of
destruction, that razed down the pride and arrogance of the demon
Soorapadman and his evil cohorts. Velan hacked away each of the demon's
heads but—lo and behold—they simply grew back! The more they did, the
more did Velan's wrath boil over. His fury reached enormous proportions;
his eyes spit sparks of fire. And finally, the demon lay dead at his hands.
The spear dropped from the Devaralan's nerveless fingers.
Suddenly, every instrument stopped its agitated performance; none but the
udukku could be heard, rattled away furiously by the head priest. The
Devaralan quaked and shivered on stage; every pore in his body jangled
with a sparking energy that seemed to fire up the nerve-endings in his brain.
“The Sannadham!” whispered his audience, comprehending his state as
almost god-like, filled with the power of divine perception, and the ability
to foretell the future. “It is time!”
And indeed, so it seemed, as the priest rattled his udukku with more energy
than ever. Presently, he focused his attention on the quivering Devaralan:
“Vela! Muruga! Commander of the Divine Armies!” he entreated. “Kandha!
Destroyer of the Demon Soora! Grant us your pearls of wisdom! Give us
knowledge of what is to happen!”
“What do you wish to know?” growled the Devaralan, shaking in the grip
of the Sannadham. “Tell me!”
“Will the rains come on time? Will our lands never lack wealth and water?”
asked the priest. “Shall the Empire flourish? May all our desires be
fulfilled?”
“The rains shall come! The land shall flourish! All your desires shall be
fulfilled! But you—you have failed—failed to satisfy my mother—failed to
worship her! You have not given her heart's desire!” shrieked the
Devaralan, caught in the grip of other—worldly power. “She asks for blood
—my mother, the fearsome Goddess Durga, Mother Kali wishes for a
sacrifice! She Who Guards the World, the Supreme Goddess
Chandikeswari, who vanquished Mahishasuran wants a sacrifice!”

“What kind of a sacrifice?” asked the priest.
“Are you prepared to offer what she wishes?” The Devaralan shook and
quivered in frenzy. “Will you give her what her heart craves?”
“We will; we will!” yelled the priest.
“Blood! The blood of kings!” The Devaralan screamed, catastrophe
colouring his voice. “My mother craves the blood of a royal dynasty that
spans a thousand years!”
Firelight cast strange, vaguely terrifying shadows on the faces of
Pazhuvettarayar, Mazhavarayar, Sambuvaraiyar and other dignitaries,
seated directly across the stage. They glanced at each other, upon the
Devaralan's startling words; their bloodshot eyes, already swimming with
the mad fervour of the evening's events, traded furtive glances.
Sambuvaraiyar directed a quick look at the priest, and gave a barely
perceptible nod.
The udukku stopped, abruptly. The Devaralan, shaking on the stage,
dropped like a felled tree. The Devaratti ran up, managed to scoop him into
her arms and made a hasty exit. The audience dispersed in silence.
Somewhere, far away, jackals howled into the night.
Vandhiyathevan, whose nerves were almost as jittery as anyone else's, what
with the excitement of the Koothu and its attendant emotions, pricked his
ears at the animals' inhuman howls. His eyes strayed almost involuntarily,
to the fortress walls.
Azhwarkkadiyaan's head rested there.
Vandhiyathevan almost jumped out of his skin, horrified. His skin broke out
in goose-pimples; the hairs on his neck rose, prickling in terror. It looked as
though-as someone had cut off Nambi's head and stuck it on the wall!
He blinked and stared at the fortress wall again—to find it empty.
Vandhiyathevan shook his head, ashamed at his morbid fancy. Nameless
fears and conjectures filled his heart; he could not find it in himself to shake
them off.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6

A Meeting at Midnight
A royal banquet was next on the agenda, once the Kuravai Koothu and
Devaralan's frantic dance came to an end; the Sambuvaraiyar clan well-nigh
outdid itself.
Vandhiyathevan, sitting down to the feast, found that the food turned to
ashes in his mouth. None of the dishes spread out for the guests' edification
delighted him. His body was exhausted; he felt a mixture of worry,
confusion and a vague disquiet that he was hard put to explain. Still, he
could hardly ignore his friend, and listened with a very creditable
assumption of enthusiasm as Kandamaran who, brimming with justifiable
pride at the honoured guests, listed every single one of them.
Aside from Pazhuvettarayar and host Sambuvaraiyar, there was
Mazhavarayar, known by his proud title of Mazhapadi Thennavan;
Mummudi Pallavarayar was present as well. Kandamaran took care to
whisper about other renowned guests in Vandhiyathevan's ears, and point
them out subtly: Thanthongi Kalingarayar; Vanangamudi Munaiyaraiyar,
Devasenapathi Poovaraiyar, Anjaatha Singam, or the Lion—hearted
Mutharaiyar, Rettai Kudai Rajaliyaar and even the Kolli Malai Peru Nila
Velaar, amongst others.
None of these men could be termed ordinary in any sense of the word; it
was no easy task to gather them all under one roof, either. All were rulers of
their own dominions, large or small as the case may be—or had earned the
status of kingship through their valorous deeds and service to the country.
The word “Raja” or “Arasar” had, by continuous usage, morphed into
“Araiyar;” it was the norm in those days, to refer to the chiefs of important
clans, or those equal to such chiefs in stature, by that prestigious title—a
nod to their ruling capabilities; sometimes, “Araiyar” was added to their

respective seats, as well. In truth, these warriors were treated more as kings
themselves, rather than chieftains, or feudal lords.
Not for nothing were they awarded such privileges. Princes and kings born
in royal families, lounging in luxury, and enjoying every comfort were not
the only ones to be addressed with respect; their titles would serve no
meaning if they could not defend themselves, or their people.
The men assembled in Sambuvaraiyar's palace were all warriors of repute;
sporting numerous scars on their battle-hardened bodies as proof of their
distinguished war service. Each had proven himself, time and again, as
capable of guarding his fort and country with his life, if necessary. All had
pledged their unconditional support and submission to Pazhaiyarai city's
Sundara Chozha, ruling their territories under his suzerainty. Some
occupied positions of great authority in the Empire as well, and carried out
their respective duties in administrative or other capacities.
By rights, Vandhiyathevan's heart ought to have been leaping with wild joy,
at the sight of such august personages at the same banquet—but he felt not
the slightest enthusiasm.
Why are so many of these kings gathered here, he wondered, more than
once. Why now? Vague suspicions and conjectures cropped up in his mind,
confounding him.
The sense of disquiet had not abated by the time he finished his meal and
retired to the isolated space Kandamaran had shown him to, for the night.
Sambuvaraiyar's royal palace was swamped with esteemed guests; it meant
that Vandhiyathevan was allotted a mere mandapam in one of the upper
balconies, open to the elements.
“Sleep well—you must be exhausted. I'll join you here, once I've seen our
other guests to their rooms,” Kandamaran assured him, before leaving.
***
Drowsiness assailed Vandhiyathevan the moment he set his head on the
floor; Nithradevi swept him into her arms almost at once.
And yet—not even the goddess of sleep can exercise much control over the
mind. The body might be at rest; the eyes closed in repose, but thoughts that
crawl around in the subconscious choose these moments to reveal

themselves. Dreams rise, shaking off the suppression of a conscious mind,
looping unconnected thoughts, fears and experiences to form surprisingly
disturbing pictures.
Far away, in the distance, a jackal began to howl. One multiplied into ten,
hundred, and a thousand-raising their voices in a howl that made his skin
prickle in terror. And that was not all; they were approaching him, step by
excruciating step. In the deep, stifling dark, their little eyes burnt in their
faces like bright, red sparks of burning coal.
There was only one way of escape; Vandhiyathevan turned in the opposite
direction —and stopped abruptly. A thousand baying hounds accosted him,
their sharp teeth practically dripping with the urge to tear him apart. Their
eyes gleamed, spitting sparks of fury in the pitch blackness.
Vandhiyathevan shuddered, barely able to string a thought together as he
contemplated his terrible fate, caught between baying hounds on one side
and a pack of jackals on the other. But then—oh, thank god, there appeared
a temple almost in front of him. Vandhiyathevan shook off his terror,
practically flew into it, and locked the doors behind him.
When he turned to finally take in his surroundings, he found that his refuge
was a Kali temple. The fierce Goddess Kali seemed to be at her terrifying
best, teeth descending in fangs; tongue hanging out in bloodthirsty fashion.
Before Vandhiyathevan could do little more than gape at the statue, a priest
danced out from behind it. He gripped a fearsome scythe in his hands. “So
—finally arrived, have you? Come here!” And he sidled closer—closer—
closer to our young man. “You are a prince, are you not? Recite your family
history!” he demanded. “How long did your ancestors rule? The truth—
now!”
“The—the Vallavaraiyars of the Vaanar clan ruled for three hundred years,”
Vandhiyathevan stammered. “We lost our kingdom because of the
Vaithumbarayars, in my father's time.”
“You are not a sacrifice worthy of the goddess,” roared the priest. “Leave!”
Abruptly, Goddess Kali's form changed into that of Krishna. A couple of
young women danced around the idol, garlands in their hands, and Andal's
melodious pasurams on their lips. Vandhiyathevan almost smiled,

mesmerized at this appealing performance, when he heard someone else
singing behind him: “Kandom, kandom, kandom …”
He turned, and saw Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi. No, not the man—but just
Azhwarkkadiyaan's head, stuck on the temple's bali peedam!
Unable to stomach this truly hideous scene, Vandhiyathevan turned
abruptly, and struck his head on a pillar. The misty wreaths of dreamscape
dissolved—but he happened to see something else that seemed to bind the
terrible strands of a nightmare with reality.
The Kadambur fort wall circled the palace at a little distance, and a head
was stuck on it, directly opposite the balcony Vandhiyathevan lay in. And
yes, it happened to belong to Azhwarkkadiyaan. This time, though,
Vandhiyathevan was sure that the sight was neither a nightmare, nor the
product of an over-active imagination: no matter how many times he
blinked or shook himself, the head remained in place. It was equally
obvious that this time, the head was attached to a stout body; Nambi's
fingers clutched the edges of the wall in a death-grip. His eyes were focused
downwards, observing something below him.
What on earth was he watching, face furrowed with concentration?
Something was terribly wrong here. Azhwarkkadiyaan could not have
arrived out of the goodness of his heart; he had some nefarious intention
tucked away; some evil plan in mind, Vandhiyathevan was sure.
And wasn't it his duty, as Kandamaran's dearest friend, to save Kadambur
from harm? What kind of a man was he to loll about in bed, when the
people who had offered him such a magnificent feast were about to be
wounded?
Vandhiyathevan sprang up, tucked his sheathed sword into his waistband,
and began walking towards where he had seen Azhwarkkadiyaan's head.
His makeshift bed had been in a corner of an upper balcony, well away
from passages in use; Vandhiyathevan had to pass through, skirt around and
walk by a great many corridors, pillars, the tops of mandapams, benches
and sthubams, to find his way to the fort wall.
He had been walking for a while along one such eternally meandering
passage, when he heard voices.

Vandhiyathevan paused. He tiptoed towards a pillar, concealed himself
behind it and leant forward, gazing down.
Below him lay a narrow courtyard, enclosed on three sides by towering
walls. Ten or twelve men were seated within. The fort wall, rising high,
failed to let in the half-moon's pearly rays—but a strategically placed iron
lamp managed to shed some light.
The courtyard's occupants were none other than Kadambur's esteemed
guests; Vandhiyathevan had seen these men-kings, lords and officials of the
Empire, at the banquet barely hours ago. Obviously, they had foregathered
at this late hour to discuss matters of great importance; Azhwarkkadiyaan
was probably doing his best to eavesdrop on their conversation. His
position was strategically advantageous; the fort and palace walls met
together in such a way that he could see the gathering below and listen to
their speech, but the reverse was not true. Ah, Azhwarkkadiyaan was clever
indeed—no doubt about it.
But he had reckoned without the Prince of Vallam, the valiant
Vandhiyathevan! No one could palm off their clever tricks of him, least of
all this stout scoundrel! He would catch this wily Nambi by the scruff of his
neck, stop him from spying on people, march him straight to his hosts and
—but how?
He would have to jump into the courtyard and walk across it to get to
Azhwarkkadiyaan—and he could hardly do so without attracting the
attention of the warriors gathered. God knew there were dangers enough in
attempting that.
Sambuvaraiyar's morose words, “I see no reason for your friend's arrival
today!” echoed in his ears. These men, these pillars that upheld Chozha
Nadu in every way, were keen on discussing gravely important matters of
state; that they wished to do in secret, was obvious from their location. His
sudden arrival in their midst would rouse all their worst suspicions. It would
be impossible to explain his real motives; Azhwarkkadiyaan would be long
gone, by then. He, Vandhiyathevan, would be chastised as the spy; the one
to suffer the ignominy of an interrogation. And, in truth, what possible
answer could he give, should they ask him about his nocturnal wanderings?
There would be only one possible outcome: Kandamaran would be put to
the blush. Ah, there he was, seated at the periphery of the crowd! He too,

seemed to be a part of this discussion. No matter; Vandhiyathevan would
ask him all about it, in the morning.
His attention wandered, at that moment, to a closed palanquin that sat
towards one side. Ah, wasn't this the one that had followed Pazhuvettarayar
on his way to Kadambur? The lady within—the one who had pulled aside
the screen with her silk—smooth, golden hands—where was she, in this
sprawling palace? Hadn't Kandamaran mentioned that the old man didn't
even dare leave her in the anthappuram? Ah, such was the case when men
married so late in life—and it was a thousand times worse when the bride
happened to be ravishingly beautiful. Men such as Pazhuvettarayar were
reduced to the pathetic state of dragging their wives along wherever they
went; so tortured were they, by wild suspicion and doubts. Now here was
this grand old warrior, reduced to the ignominy of being hopelessly
infatuated by a pretty young woman; he was little better than a slave to her
beauty. And she was no Rathi, Menakai or, the celestial Rambhai, at any
rate; Vandhiyathevan hadn't forgotten his revulsion, when he'd caught sight
of her. God knew what the great Pazhuvettarayar saw, in this supposed
beauty. Even worse was Azhwarkkadiyaan's fascination with her; why else
would he eavesdrop so desperately on this gathering, if not for the
palanquin's presence?
But then, who knew what their relationship was, to each other? Perhaps
they were siblings—or lovers? Had Pazhuvettarayar, perhaps, taken her by
force? He was certainly capable of such cavalier treatment. If so, that would
explain Azhwarkkadiyaan's preoccupation with the lady; possibly, he was
seeking an opportunity to speak with her. Ah, what did any of this matter?
Sleep beckoned; there was nothing to be gained by poking his nose into
affairs that did not concern him.
Just as the young man decided that his bed looked more inviting by the
second, a stray word from the conversation below, reached him. Someone
had mentioned his name.
Vandhiyathevan paused—and listened to the speech with all his ears.
“The young man who arrived today, claiming to be your son's friend—
where has he been quartered? It is of the utmost importance that not a
whisper of our conversation tonight reaches him. Remember, his master is
the Maathanda Nayakar of the Northern Chozha Forces; the last thing we

need is for word of our plans to leak outside. Should any of us suspect that
boy of the slightest knowledge of our meeting—make sure that he does not
leave this fort. In fact, it would be better if he is silenced, once and for all
…”
Our readers may well imagine Vandhiyathevan's sentiments, upon this
speech. He decided, then and there, that he was going nowhere, and settled
down to listen to the rest. Aditha Karikalar happened to be the Commanderin-Chief of the Northern Chozha Forces; the firstborn of King Sundara
Chozha, and the Crown Prince of the Empire. What was their objection to
Vandhiyathevan's serving under him? And what were they discussing, that
the Crown Prince could not know of, at any cost?
“Vandhiyathevan is fast asleep in a balcony above—stairs,” Kandamaran's
voice floated up to him, defending his friend. “Not a word of our
conversation is bound to reach him. He isn't the kind that pokes his nose
into business that doesn't concern him, anyway. Even if he should get wind
of our meeting, somehow, I'll make sure that he doesn't prove a hindrance to
your plans. You may rest easy—he's my responsibility.”
“Such faith in your friend, Kandamara!—touching indeed. For your sake, I
am glad of it; we know nothing of him, after all. These warnings are
necessary; we are about to speak about a supremely confidential subject;
one that will decide the fate of this very Empire. Our purpose in gathering
here is to discuss the succession to the Chozha throne. Remember—the
slightest whisper of our meeting would end in disastrous consequences for
all of us!” warned Pazhuvettarayar.
Glossary:
Bali Peedam: A slab of rounded stone, sometimes carved around the sides
and placed in front of the sanctum sanctorum of the temple. Originally
intended for sacrifices in times long gone, the practice was discontinued.
These days, it is used more for offerings or rice.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 7

Of Mirth—and Consequences
The moment he heard the words, “succession to the throne,”
Vandhiyathevan decided that he would listen to the entire conversation.
What were these men about to discuss, regarding the succession? What
right did they have, to do so, anyway? No, his duty was clear: he would
have to do some eavesdropping himself, and there was no better place to do
it than in his current location. Azhwarkkadiyaan could go hang himself;
who cared what became of him?
Something was about to happen here: something mysterious, and
disquieting enough to ruffle the realm, if possible. For quite some time now,
Vandhiyathevan had been plagued by the niggling suspicion that the
Kadambur Palace was the nerve-centre of strange happenings:
Azhwarkkadiyaan's odd little speeches; the palace sentries' heavyhandedness; Sambuvaraiyar's belligerent welcome—if, indeed, it could be
called that—the Devaralan's frenzied call for sacrifice—all of these had
sparked a discomfort in him that could not be alleviated. Now here was a
god-given opportunity to rid himself of conjectures, and find out exactly
what was happening. Why on earth would he waste it?
Ah, not even his beloved Kandamaran could find it in himself to confide
about the evening's activities—here he was at this clandestine meeting,
having persuaded his friend to sleep in an isolated balcony! Vandhiyathevan
would be sure to give him a piece of his mind, tomorrow.
By this time, Pazhuvettarayar had begun to speak; Vandhiyathevan
concentrated on every word.
“My purpose in journeying here is to give you news of great import; it is
also the reason for why Sambuvaraiyar has gathered us all. King Sundara
Chozha's state of health is extremely precarious. I have made enquiries of

the royal physicians; they are all decided in their opinion: there is not much
hope—his days are numbered.” Pazhuvettarayar paused. “It behooves us
now, to come to a decision on a future course of action.”
“What do the astrologers say?” came a voice from the midst of the
gathering.
“Why consult them about this?” put in someone else. “Haven't we all seen a
comet in the skies, late at night, for a while now?”
“The astrologers' prognosis it to postpone the inevitable by a few weeks,”
answered Pazhuvettarayar. “Whatever the outcome, it is up to us to decide
the successor to the Chozha throne—”
“What would be the use of contemplating such a thing?” asked a hoarse
voice. “Aditha Karikalar was announced Crown Prince more than two years
ago, was he not?”
“True—but I should like to know which of us, if any, were consulted,
before such a peremptory decision was taken. All of us here have pledged
body and soul to the Chozha dynasty for more than a hundred years; our
clans go back centuries, and have been in service to the Empire for more
than four generations. My great grandfather sacrificed his life in the
Thiruppurambiyam battle; my grandfather in the conflict at Velur; my father
in the battle at Thakkolam. Everyone here has lost a valued family member,
our sons even, guarding this Empire—today, the war raging in Eezham has
our youngsters standing shoulder to shoulder, destroying our foes. And yet
—none of us were asked for our opinions, when it came to choosing the
heir to the throne. You will recall that even King Dasarathar called for a
council to choose the Crown Prince for Ayodhya; he sent for his ministers,
commanders, aides, generals and feudal lords, convened a
mandhiralosanai, and made sure their concerns were heard. Sundara
Chozha Maharaja, on the other hand—”
“… may not have asked our advice, it is true—but our illustrious Treasurer
is not quite correct to presume that none were consulted. After all, Periya
Piratti, the noble Chembian Mahadevi, and Ilaiya Piratti, the honourable
Kundhavai Devi were both taken into his confidence, were they not?” asked
a faintly mocking voice. “Can Pazhuvettarayar honestly claim, now, that
Sundara Chozhar made an arbitrary decision about his heir?”

A wave of mirth flowed over the audience.
“Ah, you laugh!—how you can find it in yourself to be amused at this
pathetic situation, I shall never quite understand. My heart burns, my blood
boils; I am moved to wonder at the purpose of my pitiful existence on earth!
The Devaralan asked for the blood of a royal whose dynasty has flourished
a thousand years—do me a favour, all of you, and offer me up to Goddess
Durga! My clan has made Chozha Nadu its home for more than a thousand
years; you may all cleave my head from my body with your swords;
Goddess Durga is bound to be pleased with my blood—and my soul will
find some measure of peace!”
Pazhuvettarayar came to a stop, finally, chest heaving, voice shaking with
as much frenzied emotion as the possessed Devaralan, that evening.
Silence reigned for a while. The west wind whirred through the courtyard.
Trees outside the fort swung madly in the stiff breeze, their branches
rustling and whispering against the fort walls.
“The King of Pazhuvoor must pardon our thoughtless speeches and laughter
—ridicule was very far from our minds; such was not our intention. You are
our peerless leader, and each one of us here is willing to deem your smallest
wish, our command,” supplicated Sambuvaraiyar, at his humblest. “Yours is
the right to lead us; yours is the path we seek to follow. Pray, accept our
apologies, my lord.”
“I beg your pardon for having lost my temper, as well. Do, but listen: this
time, a hundred years ago, Vijayalaya Chozha reduced the Mutharayar
dynasty to dust and captured Thanjavur; he ranged himself on the side of
the Pallavas and destroyed the Pandiyan armies in the Thiruppurambiyam
Battle. Ever since then, the Chozha Empire has grown by leaps and bounds
—I doubt if it possessed the territories it does today, in the times of great
Emperor Karikalar, who raised the banks of the Kaveri. Today, our
magnificent Empire stretches from the tip of the Kumari, to the banks of the
River Thungabhadhra and Krishna. We have Pandiya Nadu, Nanjil Nadu,
Thondai Mandalam, Paagi Nadu, Gangapadi, Nulambampadi, Vaithumbar
Nadu, Seetpuli Nadu, Perumpaanappadi, Kudagu Nadu, the birthplace of
Kaveri, paying tributes as our vassals. Even Chera Nadu, which has a
history of never submitting to others, acknowledges our suzerainty. Our
glorious tiger flag flutters in all these countries, proclaiming our superiority;

by rights, Eezham in the south, Vengi and Rettai Mandalam in the North
ought to have come to their knees, before our onslaught. As to why they
have not—surely my friends here are aware of the reasons?”
“Indeed. There are only two: one is Aditha Karikalar, the Maathanda
Nayakar of the Northern Chozha Forces; the other is his young brother, the
Commander of the Southern Armies, Arulmozhi Varmar—”
“Mazhavarayar speaks the truth. All the Kings I knew favoured timehonoured means of choosing their generals, or commanders; warriors who
had excelled in wars and sported their scars proudly, with years of
experience at their backs were usually deemed most suitable to lead armies;
such was the custom in our Empire too, for the last hundred years. But now
—now, we have the Crown Prince, quartered with vast armies in the North,
supposed to reap victories against Vengi and Rettai Mandalam—and what
does he do, instead? Squats on his hind-quarters in Kanchi, building a
palace of gold. I ask you, respected members of this gathering, scions of
Thamizhagam's oldest and, and most valiant families—which of the rulers
of this land has ever built himself a golden palace? Not even Paranthaka
Chakravarthy, who vanquished Madurai, Eezham, and now resides, in
resplendent glory, in the heavenly abode of Kailasam, ever wished such an
extravagant residence for himself. What he did accomplish, was to present
the Chidambaram Temple with a roof of gold. But witness, if you please,
the lofty aims of our revered Crown Prince! Apparently, the hoary palaces
of the Pallava Emperors are not quite suited to the status of the heir to the
throne; he builds a palace of gold and embeds diamonds and precious
stones into its walls! Not a single measly copper coin of the treasures he
carried away from Nulambampadi, Gangapadi or Kudagu has made it back
to the Chozha royal treasury —”
“The Golden Palace is complete, then?”
“I have reliable information from my spies that work is, indeed, at an end.
Sundara Chozhar has received quite a few missives from our Prince as well.
Apparently, his beloved and dutiful firstborn wishes his father to reside in
the Golden Palace, for a while.”
“Is the Maharaja to stay in Kanchi?” asked a worried voice.

“Never fear. My trusted brother and I, together, shall make sure that such an
eventuality will never come to pass. None can pass into Thanjai fort without
our express approval, seek an audience with the King, or present any kind
of olai to him. I have, in fact, made sure that two or three such palm-leaves
have been successfully intercepted.”
“Ah! Long live Pazhuvettarayar! Praise be to his strategies!” rose several
voices in a shout. “May his valour rise to greater heights! Truly, you are a
Chanakya among us!”
“There is more, my friends. If you thought the Crown Prince off his royal
mind—wait until you listen to the doings of Prince Arulmozhi Varmar,
fighting a war in Ilankai. Reflect, if you please, on the methods of waging
war: on our own experiences thus far, and on traditions that have been in
place for a hundred years. Should we ever march into an enemy's lands, our
armies seize what food they can from the surrounding areas; our rewards
are the loot plundered from their treasuries—and they are the chief source
of payment, to our soldiers. The surplus must be transferred to the royal
treasury, in the capital. But listen to Prince Arulmozhi Varmar's high-flown
sentiments, if you please: He believes that plundering the local food sources
is a despicable act, and wishes for food grains to be sent from
Thamizhagam! The good god above knows that I have sent more than ten
shipments of grains and pulses—”
“What idiocy is this!” “Such foolishness!” rose outraged voices. “Such
things have never been heard of!” “Why must we put up with this
injustice?”
“Do but listen to Arulmozhi Varmar's odd explanation for his outlandish
conduct: he refuses to plunder local food sources, as that would lead to
discontent and misery among the local populace. Our battle, he believes, is
with Eezham's rulers; the people should not be made to suffer for his sake.
Once he has vanquished them and their armies, he would much prefer to
secure their approval and happiness, before he establishes his rule over
them!”
“I have seen and heard many unnatural things in battle, but to acquire the
goodwill of the people about to be invaded …” mumbled one member of
the gathering, disbelief evident in his voice. “What does he wish us to do—
fall at their feet?”

“Witness the result of their hare-brained tactics: both our princes have
ensured that the treasury and granaries are almost empty. And I am placed
in the uncomfortable position of heaping taxes on you, to make good the
deficit! Such is my duty, after all—and if it were not for the fact that the
Empire's fate weighs heavily on my conscience, I would have resigned this
revolting post years ago!”
“Never—never! The Pazhuvoor King is the only reason the Empire has not
crumbled into dust, by now; your iron will and conscience ensures our
protection. But have you not sought an audience with the King, regarding
such pressing concerns?”
“A thousand times have I tried—only to be repulsed categorically. Should I
ever require His Majesty's advice, I am, if you please, supposed to bow
down to the superior guidance of Periya Piratti or Ilaiya Piratti! I tell you,
the King has lost the will or ability to think for himself—at no moment does
he seek our opinions in vital matters. His beloved Chembian Mahadevi
stands in the role of a mentor; her words are as holy as the Vedhas, to him.
Or, he wishes us to seek the opinion of his beloved daughter Kundhavai—
he believes her understanding to be most superior, and capable of
addressing all our concerns. I!—I and other ministers, who have grown grey
in our service, are expected to stand at attention in front of this chit of a girl
—a girl whose dainty feet have not stepped beyond Kollidam in the North,
and River Kudamurutti in the South—and beg for her precious indulgence!
Have you ever heard of women being allowed such free reign in matters of
state, in any kingdom? How long do you expect me to bear such insult to
my name and fame? But there is a way out: you could come to a unanimous
decision and demand my resignation; I should be very glad indeed to free
myself from these stupid affairs, and consign myself to my home—”
“Never! The Pazhuvoor King must not even think to utter such terrible
words,” Sambuvaraiyar called out. “The Chozha Empire stands today on
the shoulders of thousands of warriors, strengthened by the blood of four
generations of our men; nothing will induce us to see it ground into dust, in
our lifetime!”
“My friends and compatriots—I rest my case,” finished Pazhuvettarayar.
“Our Empire is now governed by females; we have a veritable Alli Rajyam,

on our hands. How do we rectify this terrible state of affairs?” He paused.
“What do we do?”
Glossary:
Kudagu: Today's Coorg, in Karnataka
Alli Rajyam: Said to be a legend in the Mahabharata, Alli was a Pandiyan
queen who harboured such hatred for men that every single official in her
kingdom, administrative or otherwise, was a woman. Men, it is said, were
little more than playthings in her rule and she treated them with contempt—
until, of course, her nemesis arrived in the form of Arjuna, the most macho
of the Pandava brothers, who subjugated her and “made her a true woman.”
The tale was all the rage, re-told in street-plays and theatres among the
general populace; the “Alli Kadhai,” and “Alli Arasani Maalai” were and
are, popular folk versions.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 8

“Who is in the Palanquin?”
A confused babble of voices arose from the men gathered in the courtyard,
as everyone seemed to speak at once. Discussions, opinions and arguments
erupted in a dozen corners and for a while, Vandhiyathevan was hard put to
understand a single word, or recognize the man who uttered it.
Sambuvaraiyar, who seemed to come to his senses first, spoke up. “Aren't
we required to furnish Pazhuvettarayar with some sort of answer?” His
voice rang in strident tones, around the courtyard. “What is the purpose of
arguing endlessly amongst ourselves? The night is into its third jaamam as
it is; the moon swims in the night sky. We must come to a decision—
quickly.”
“I am plagued, if you will pardon me, with a doubt. Perhaps others cherish
the same sentiments as I,” came the hoarse voice that had spoken earlier.
“Should the Lord of Pazhuvoor not object, I should like to voice it, and seek
clarification.”
“It is Vanangamudiyaar who speaks, is it not?” said Pazhuvettarayar, in a
tone that brooked no argument. “Let him rise and come to the light.”
“It is I, indeed. And here I am.”
“I reserve my fury for battlefields and enemies—not those I consider my
allies, and friends. You may speak your mind, without any scruple.”
“I believe I will. The King of Pazhuvoor lists certain crimes against the
King Sundara Chozha Maharaja—but is it not true that some level the same
charges against Pazhuvettarayar, as well?” asked Vanangamudiyaar. “I do
not say I believe it—indeed, I do not—but I should like to know the truth,
in any case.”
“Pray, enlighten me—what is the truth that you wish to know?”

“This assembly is well aware of the fact that the Lord of Pazhuvoor married
a young woman a few years ago—”
Sambuvaraiyar's voice cut in at this point, burning with anger. “This is
outrageous—I am sure I speak for everyone here, when I say that we object
to Vanangamudiyaar's tactless comment. To address our peerless leader in
such a way—to level such an accusation against our general, our leader who
has our best interests at heart is akin to blasphemy! In short—”
“Much as I appreciate the sentiment, I entreat Sambuvaraiyar to remain
patient, and allow Vanangamudiyaar to ask his questions. There is nothing
more poisonous than a mind riddled with suspicion; far better to lance the
boil and relieve oneself of unending doubts. I did, at the late age of fiftyfive and more years, marry a young woman—I admit this with no qualms
whatsoever. But when, my friends, have I ever claimed that I was an
incarnation of Lord Rama, born in this Kali Yuga? I have never claimed to
be an Ekapathni Viradhan either; bound to one wife. I fell in love with her,
and she with me; we found our hearts united, and wedded each other
according to ancient Thamizh customs. Pray, is this a crime?”
“No—not at all!” rose several voices in unison.
“It was never my intention to accuse you of matrimony, My Lord. Who,
amongst us, has bound himself to merely one wife, after all? And yet—yet”
“Yes? There is no reason to hesitate. Ask what you will.”
“There is talk that Pazhuvettarayar listens far too much to his young queen,
the Ilaiya Rani. Worse—that he consults her even regarding affairs of state
and royalty. That he takes her with him, where he goes.”
A wave of laughter rose in the crowd.
“Stop!” Sambuvaraiyar sprang up again, voice shaking with fury. “Who
dared to laugh, just now? Show yourselves! What gives you the right to jeer
at our leader?” He unsheathed his sword, almost growling.
“If it is any consolation, it was I who laughed,” admitted Pazhuvettarayar.
Then, he turned to Vanangamudiyaar. “Tell me—is it such a crime to take
my lawfully wedded wife, who bears my thaali around her neck, wherever I
go? It is true that I rarely stay away from her—but to accuse me of

consulting her regarding state affairs is unjust. I have not done so, and never
will.”
“If that be the case, I pray that Pazhuvettarayar answers just one more
question—and I shall pronounce myself satisfied. What does a closed
palanquin, meant to stay within the walls of an anthappuram, do here?
What is its place, among those who are involved in discussing such serious
matters as the succession? Is there anyone within? If not, whose are the
bangles that clinked a while ago—or the throat that cleared itself?”
A strange, uneasy silence settled over the courtyard. Since everyone present
had entertained Vanangamudiyaar's suspicions at one point or the other
during the meeting, no ringing protest rose against him. Sambuvaraiyar's
lips did, in fact, mumble a few words, but they were too indistinct for
anyone to understand.
Pazhuvettarayar it was, who chose to cleave the stifling silence with his
strong, confident voice. “An excellent question, and one that deserves an
explanation. Be sure that I shall give it, when this meeting is at an end. May
I have half a naazhigai more? Surely my esteemed friends trust me enough
to grant me this favour?”
“We do, we do!” exclaimed many voices. “We have complete faith in you!”
“I assure you that I cherish as much regard for Pazhuvettarayar, as anyone
assembled here,” explained Vanangamudiyaar. “I posed these questions
only because he bade me clear my mind. I swear, here and now, that his
every wish is my command, and I am prepared to do anything to carry it
out. Should I be required to sacrifice my life in his service, so be it!”
“I have the greatest faith in Vanangamudiyaar's loyalty; in fact, I am aware
of every one of your trustworthiness, and I cherish your regard. For that
very reason, it becomes all the more important for us to remember why we
chose to meet, and come to a decision about several important affairs. King
Sundara Chozhar may live long and rule his Empire as he wishes—but we
are here to consider the possibility that that rosy future may not come to
pass. If the royal physicians were to be proven right—if the comet in the
sky proves to be a portent omen—it behooves us to decide on the rightful
successor to the Chozha throne.”

“We request Pazhuvettarayar to give us his honoured opinion, on such
matters. None of us would venture a word against yours.”
“On the contrary—at no other time has it been so important for all of you to
speak up, and inform me of your views. At this juncture, I should like to
take the opportunity to remind us all of certain events in the past. Twenty
four years ago, the great warrior, saint and pious ruler, King Kandaradithya
ascended the heavenly abode; his son, Madhuranthaka Thevar was a mere
infant, a year old, at that time. It was for this reason that Kandaradithya
wished to place his brother, Arinjaya Thevar, on the Chozha throne and rule
after him; we were informed of his wishes by his devoted wife, Empress
Chembian Maadevi. And it was loyalty to our king that made us agree to
such an arrangement. Unfortunately, cruel destiny did not allow Arinjaya to
rule our land for more than a year; his son Paranthaka Sundara Chozhar was
a strapping young man of twenty years. We, the Empire's pillars, the
ministers, aides, chieftains, lords, kottam and kootram officials gathered,
discussed the best interests of the country, and crowned Sundara Chozhar as
King. There is no doubt that this was an excellent decision; until two years
ago, Sundara Chozhar gave us no cause to doubt his rule. He consulted us
upon royal matters, and events prospered as ever before. Now however, his
health is deteriorating—and that circumstance leaves us with certain
questions. Kandaradithya's honoured son, Madhuranthaka Thevar is now an
extremely capable prince; his piety, accomplishments, intelligence and
character make him an eligible contender for the throne. In the meanwhile,
Aditha Karikalar, Sundara Chozhar's firstborn is stationed in Kanchi as the
Commander of the Northern Chozha Forces. My friends—who, among
these two men, is eligible for the throne? I ask you to consider royal
tradition and practice, thus far; to consult what Manu Needhi tells us. What,
according to the dictates of fairness and justice, would be your decision?
Would you choose Madhuranthaka Thevar, son of the elder Kandaradithya?
Or Aditha Karikalar, the grandson of the younger Sundara Chozhar? Think
—think carefully; search your mind, and give me your opinion …”
“Kandaradithya's son Madhuranthaka Thevar is the rightful heir to the
throne,” answered Sambuvaraiyar promptly. “That decision, my lord, is
according to the dictates of justice, fairness, and righteousness.”
“True!” “This is my decision as well,” “I agree!” murmured the others, one
by one.

“Your opinion is mine; the Chozha throne does, indeed, belong to
Madhuranthaka Thevar. But such a decision, although easy to make, will
entail enormous difficulty, if it must be enforced. Tell me—is everyone here
prepared to undergo any hardship, to make it so? Do we swear to sacrifice
our body, soul and wealth in fighting for Madhuranthakar's rights, and to
restore them to him? Do I have your assurance that you will all pledge
yourselves to this noble cause, at the sacred feet of Goddess Durga?”
Pazhuvettarayar's voice fairly rang with a new fervour.
Silence descended on the gathering again.
“We are prepared to swear, in the presence of God, that we shall sacrifice
anything to uphold Madhuranthaka Thevar's rights,” Sambuvaraiyar, finally,
spoke up. “All of us do wish, however, to ask you something before we do:
what are the Prince's own sentiments? Is he prepared and willing to ascend
the throne? Many are the tales of the piety of Kandaradithya's son, that he
takes no joy in worldly pleasures, and devotes himself completely to the
worship of Siva Peruman. We have heard, too, that nothing could be farther
from his desire, than to rule this Empire. In addition, his mother, Chembian
Mahadevi does not wish it either. We should like to know the truth of such
statements, if you please.”
“An excellent question—asked at the right time too. I shall answer it in a
way satisfactory to everyone. In point of fact, it ought to have been
answered much before. I beg your pardon for not doing so,”
Pazhuvettarayar began, with a preamble. “The whole country knows that
Chembian Mahadevi has done everything in her power to turn her son away
from thoughts of the throne, and towards worship of the divine. What
neither the country, nor its people know, are her reasons for doing so.
Should it ever become known that Madhuranthakar wished to ascend the
throne, Periya Piratti feared that such knowledge would put a period to his
existence—”
“Ah! Is that so?” exclaimed several voices.
“Indeed. Any mother worth the title would wish her son alive and
uncrowned, rather than see him rule, and be murdered. Madhuranthaka
Thevar, to whom his mother's words are as sacred as the Vedhas, duly
devoted himself completely to God, spurned all worldly pleasures and spent
his time in worship of Siva Peruman. For some time, though—his

sentiments have been undergoing a steady change. He has begun to feel that
he has a right to ascend the throne, and to wish to govern the country in the
best way possible. He is prepared to voice his sentiments in public, once he
is secure in the knowledge of your fealty to him—”
“And what is the proof of this?”
“Certainly, I am prepared to provide as much and more proof, as you wish.
But if I do—will you all swear to pledge yourselves to his cause and rule?”
“We will! We will!” The gathering assented vociferously.
“I hope no one entertains any further doubts?”
“No, none at all!”
“In that case, there is no reason to delay—here is the proof you have all
been waiting for. And I have an opportunity to clear Vanangamudiyaar's
suspicions as well.” Pazhuvettarayar rose, walked majestically towards the
palanquin in a corner, and stopped beside it.
“My Prince—we require your presence here, amongst us,” he said, in his
humblest voice. “Do step out of the palanquin, and cast your eyes on these
warriors, these pillars of strength, who are prepared to lay their lives down,
to uphold your noble cause!”
Vandhiyathevan, who had been listening to the courtyard conversation with
all his ears from behind his pillar, above-stairs, now leant forward carefully,
and peered down.
A slender golden hand—the same, delicate, rose-leaf complexioned limb he
had seen that evening—crept out of the palanquin, and gently pushed aside
the screen. Except that, what he had believed was a woman's bangle, was, in
fact a kanganam, an ornament usually worn by princes. The next instant,
that face, the one that resembled the golden fullness of a radiant moon,
appeared from behind the screen. A man, with a form that rivaled the
beauty of Manmadhan himself, stepped out, smiling at the warriors in the
courtyard.
Ah—wasn't this Prince Madhuranthakar, the son of King Kandaradithya?
His presence within a palanquin had made Vandhiyathevan had mistake him
for a woman. He threw a swift glance at the fort wall—was

Azhwarkkadiyaan, who had committed the same error, still eavesdropping
on the scene?
Tree branches shadowed that section of the fort wall, however, and nothing
could be seen.
By this time, the courtyard below was resounding with ferocious shouts and
chants: “Long live Madhuranthaka Thevar! Long live the Crown Prince!”
Men unsheathed their swords, raised their spears, and raised their voices to
the heavens. “Vetri vel! Veera vel!”
To remain here anymore would lead to complications; Vandhiyathevan
slipped away from pillar, returned to his bed in the isolated balcony, and lay
down.
Glossary:
Manu Needhi: According to Hindu tradition, the one who is the at the head
of Mankind, and created a set of laws and rules, for humankind to live by.
Manmadhan: The god of love, and a celestial being who is, according to
Hindu mythology, the most beautiful being ever to be seen on both heaven
and earth.
Vetri vel-Veera vel: Literally, May the Spear be Victorious. An ancient
battle cry which has its roots in the battle waged by Lord Muruga against
his demonic enemies, in which he used his weapon, the spear, to great
success.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 9

Conversations by the Wayside
Much of Vandhiyathevan's life had been spent in the arid lands, north of the
River Paalaaru. Swimming in a river, therefore, was a skill unknown to him.
Once, stationed as a sentry on the banks of the Vada Pennai, he had stepped
into its swirling waters for a quick dip. Too late, he realized his mistake,
and ignorance in even attempting it: the wicked current grabbed hold of him
and simply pulled him under. Vandhiyathevan thrashed round and round,
his limbs paralyzed by the sheer force of the water. Fatigue settled over him
like a stifling blanket. Just as he decided that he was done for, and the Vada
Pennai was going to be his watery, unmarked grave—a sudden swirl caught
him, and practically threw him out. Vandhiyathevan praised every deity he
had ever heard of as he washed upon the shore in an exhausted heap, and
made a miraculous escape.
Lying on his bed in a balcony of the Sambuvaraiyar palace that night, he
was conscious of the same, helpless feeling—caught unawares in a
crippling whirlpool. Except that this time, it was not a river, at least not in
the literal sense, but an enormous, vicious royal conspiracy. Would he be
able to escape this one's clutches the same way?
What he had learnt, eavesdropping on the meeting that night, almost
overwhelmed him. It had been only a few years, after all, since the Chozha
empire shook off endless onslaughts from external factors; for a while now,
its people had been able to breathe easy, unafraid of invasions. Crown
Prince Aditha Karikalar was responsible a good deal for this state of affairs:
a soldier through and through, an expert in war strategies, and almost a
Chanakya when it came to battling enemies, he utilized Chozha armies and
resources to their fullest, and released Thondai Mandalam completely, from
the shackles of Rettai Mandalam's King Krishna. That had taken care of
foes from without.

What though, of the enemies who threatened the empire from within?
Weren't they a great deal more dangerous than enemies who challenged you
in public? What would be the result of this battle that had erupted within
Chozha factions?
Ah, weren't the Chozha empire's own warriors, ministers, lords and officials
a part of this terrible conspiracy? The reputation, resources and power that
Pazhuvettarayar and his younger brother commanded—was there anyone
else, except perhaps the King, who could rival them? And what of the other
kings and lords present? Each of them was powerful in his right, lord of his
own territories and man-power. Not to mention their fame in battle, as well.
Was this the first time they had gathered? Or had there been other
clandestine meetings, with Madhuranthakar hiding away in closed
palanquins? Ah, Pazhuvettarayar's marriage at such a late date had had its
uses!
Until that evening, not the lightest doubt had entered Vandhiyathevan's
mind, about the succession. Aditha Karikalar was the undisputed Crown
Prince, the choice of both King and people; it had never occurred to him
that there might be competition from other quarters. Like other citizens, he
knew of Madhuranthakar, of course, and had heard tales of Kandaradithya's
son immersing himself in worship and saintly thoughts. Not for an instant
had he entertained the suspicion that Madhuranthakar might have an actual
claim on the throne—or that he might consider himself a contender for it.
But—to quote someone's words in the meeting itself—what was right, as
per the dictates of justice and fairness? Was Aditha Karikalar the rightful
heir to the throne—or Madhuranthakar?
The more Vandhiyathevan mulled over it, the more did he feel that both
claims had equal merit. If they did decide to contest each other's rights—
who would win? And what would his own position be, if it came down to a
pitched battle?
Ah, the dreams Vandhiyathevan had cherished, when he first set out from
Kanchi! The fantasies he had built up, hoping to ascend to a great position
in the Empire under the aegis of the Crown Prince—why, at one point, he
had even nurtured hopes of winning back the Vaanar's ancient kingdom, and
restoring them to their former glory! And now—now the very branch he
had chosen, to clamber onto a magnificent tree, seemed about to splinter.

Vandhiyathevan tossed and turned in his bed for a long time, plagued by
doubts and conjectures. The fourth jaamam had arrived and with it, dawn,
when he finally succumbed to sleep a second time.
The result of all this was that he did not wake up early; not even when the
sun's red-hot rays scorched him the next morning. It took Kandamaran's
good-natured slap to bring him to awareness; Vandhiyathevan jerked
awake, startled out of his wits.
“Slept well?” enquired Kandamaran, after the usual practice of hosts, to
their guests. Then he volunteered, “I did come here late last night—but you
were so immersed in your worship of Kumbakarnan that I didn't have the
heart to disturb your penance,” he grinned.
It took a great deal of forbearance for Vandhiyathevan to clamp down the
words that bubbled up his throat, but he did. “I remember lying down here,
after the Kuravai Koothu, but nothing else. Ah, it looks like almost a
jaamam has passed since daybreak—I must start at once. Kandamara, do
instruct your men to saddle my horse!”
“Well, here's a good one! What do you mean, you have to leave at once?
There's no hurry; stay a while, perhaps ten days.”
“I'm afraid I can't, my friend. I've had news that my uncle is in a very bad
way, in Thanjavur—apparently, he's on his deathbed,” Vandhiyathevan
rattled off, perjuring his soul without a qualm. “I must set off at once, if I
ever hope to see him.”
“In that case, you must promise to stop here, on your way back.”
“By all means. Now, do please let me take my leave.”
“Such haste! Do but settle yourself down for a while, until at least morning
meal. I'd like to accompany you as far as the Kollidam.”
“But—how can you? With so many important guests vying for your
attention—”
“No one here is more important to me than you—!” Kandamaran bit his lip,
and paused. “It's true that we're entertaining esteemed guests at the moment,
but they have my father to play host, and the palace officials, besides. I
couldn't talk to you even for a while last night. I was hoping we could do

so, on our way to the Kollidam. I shan't rest until we do—and I'm coming
with you, no matter what!”
“I've no objection, in that case,” Vandhiyathevan acquiesced. “Do as you
please.”
A naazhigai later saw the two friends canter off on their horses, from
Sambuvaraiyar's palace. Their pace was slow; the morning, mellow and
peaceful. So engrossed were the young men in reminiscing their past, that
neither paid any attention to the rustling west wind, showering them with
clouds of dust.
“I may have stayed at your palace just for a night, Kandamara—but it's
done me a world of good,” Vandhiyathevan remarked casually, after a
while. “I'm a little disappointed about just one thing, though. All those
endless descriptions you gave of your sister's remarkable beauty on the
banks of Vada Pennai—and I could barely catch a glimpse of her, last
evening! All I could see, when she peeped out from behind her mother, was
an eighth of her face. My friend, I'm frustrated! Thamizh girls ought to
behave with decorum and a proper degree of bashfulness—but your sister
has a little too much of them, I tell you!”
Kandamaran's lips trembled with the urge to speak—but not a word came
out.
“Never mind, though,” Vandhiyathevan prattled on. “You've invited me to
stay for a few days on my journey back home, after all. Be sure that I'll take
every opportunity to remedy these bashful silences! Your sister wouldn't
think of hiding behind her mother's back when she's known me for a while,
would she? By the way—what did you say her name was?”
“Manimegalai.”
“Ah, a truly sweet name! Now, if she were only as pretty and goodhumoured as her name suggests—”
Kandamaran cut in, at this point. “My friend, I beg of you—forget my
sister. Forget what I said about her to you as well. Don't ever bring her up,
again!”
“Good god, this is a turnaround! What on earth happened to everything you
said last evening, about offering me a son-in-law's welcome?”

“I don't deny that I said a great many things—but do ignore them, for my
sake. Things have changed. My parents have decided to give her in
marriage to someone else. Manimegalai has accepted, as well.”
Well done, my girl, mused Vandhiyathevan. It did not seem difficult to him,
to guess the identity of the probable groom either—who else but the royal
Madhuranthakar, occupant of a closed palanquin, would do for them? It was
obvious that they were garnering as many profitable alliances as they could,
for the prince. Ha, Pazhuvettarayar's cunning surpassed all! “So you've
decided on one of your royal guests as her groom? To tell the truth,
Kandamara, I'm neither disappointed nor surprised. I expected something of
the kind—”
“You did?”
“Think, my friend—an orphan is hardly the first choice for parents with
hopeful daughters. I have neither home nor country; my ancestors may have
ruled these parts once, but they've been dust on the ground for years. I'm not
surprised that no girl wishes me for a husband—”
“Stop, please —! If you truly think I and my parents would descend to such
lowly conduct—but we wouldn't. And it isn't what you think, either. There
are reasons for our decision. You'll realize how important they were, soon
enough. I'm afraid I can't say any more—but I hope to, some day.”
“You're very mysterious all of a sudden, Kandamara. What's happened?”
“Forgive me—I know I'm talking in riddles, but it can't be helped. Do
believe me when I say that you're as much my friend now, as you were
before. When it's time, you'll be the first person I shall open my heart to!
Trust me to do the right thing until then. Know that I'll never betray you,
whatever the cost.”
“I'm happy to hear it—but I fail to see the point of all this talk of betrayal
and trust. You do realize that I depend on my own sword and spear for my
protection, and not others?”
“Soon, there will come a time when you'll need to use that very sword and
spear in battle. And by god's grace, we will stand shoulder to shoulder on
the same side, and who knows, your ambitions might be fulfilled as well—”

“Battle? Do you expect there to be one in the near future? Or were you,
perhaps, intending to join the war in Eezham?”
“Eezham? Good god, you'd laugh to know the spectacle they're making of
themselves, there! Do you know that the Chozha forces require food and
grains to be sent to them, from here? Ridiculous, is what I say—but that's
not what I'm talking about. No, don't try to get anything more out of me.
Stay patient; you'll know everything in due course.”
“As you wish. You needn't tell me anything you don't want to,” soothed
Vandhiyathevan. “And there's the Kollidam, at last.”
The river did indeed grow visible with every step; within moments, the
friends had arrived on its banks.
The month of Aadi had arrived in a truly auspicious fashion; the river
almost overflowed its banks as waters rushed by. So vast was the river's
dimensions that trees on the other side looked like tiny bushes. Red-brown
waters thundered by, swirling and dimpling, the currents causing deep
whirlpools, frolicking on their eager way to join the sea in the east.
Vandhiyathevan stared at the sight, bewitched, listening to the floods trying
to break the banks and the deafening sound of water crashing along.
A boat bobbed alone, in the ferry; two men stood in it as well, oars ready in
their hands. They had a passenger already and by the looks of it, he seemed
to be a man steeped in Siva worship.
One of the boatmen craned his neck and peered at the newcomers. “Master,
would you be wishful of coming with us?”
“Not I, just him,” answered Kandamaran. “Wait a moment.”
The friends descended from their steeds. Vandhiyathevan clucked his
tongue in dismay. “Ah, what a fool I am—how will I get my horse into this
boat?”
“Unnecessary—here are two men, behind us. One will take your horse back
to Kadambur. The other will accompany you in the boat, and procure a
horse for you on the opposite bank.”
“Such forethought, Kandamara! I'm impressed. You're a friend indeed.”

“You might have believed the Kollidam to be along the lines of the smaller
Paalaaru or Pennai, perhaps. It probably didn't occur to you that you
couldn't just walk your horse across.”
“Indeed. I crave pardon for having underestimated your Chozha country's
magnificent rivers. Ha, would you just look at these thundering waters?
Why, it seems more an ocean!”
It was time for farewell; the friends embraced each other warmly.
Vandhiyathevan walked along the shore and climbed into the boat. One of
Kandamaran's men did so, as well. Everything appeared to be in readiness;
the boatmen lowered their oars into the water.
Abruptly, a voice called out to them, from afar. “Stop! Stop the boat!”
The boatmen paused in their rowing. The one who had shouted approached
the banks, running helter-skelter. Vandhiyathevan recognized
Azhwarkkadiyaan the moment he set eyes on the heaving, gasping figure.
It seemed his co-passenger had, as well. “Row, row away at once,” he
yelled. “I will not stay in this boat an instant if that Vaishnavite gets into it!”
Vandhiyathevan, though, would not hear of it. “Stay, if you please. There's
plenty of space—we may as well take him along.”
His motives were not all altruistic. In truth—he wanted, very much, to pick
Nambi's brain about last night's mysterious happenings.
Glossary:
Kumbakarnan: Younger brother of the Demon King Ravanan, Lord of
Lanka. A giant known for his skills as a warrior, he had one great weakness:
sleep. It was a Herculean task to wake him up and he was generally
ravenous when he did, but his expertise in war more than made up for. This
predilection for sleep was, legend says, the result of a wrongly-worded
wish: when, after prolonged penance, Brahma offered him a boon,
Kumbakarnan asked for Nidravatvam (sleep), instead of Nirdevatvam
(destruction of the Devas). This, it's said, was because of the intervention of
Goddess Saraswathi, who jumbled his mind (and tongue, it appears). Unlike
his many demon contemporaries, Kumbakarnan seemed to posses a
conscience—he actually protested Sita's abduction, and advised his brother

to restore her to Rama. His loyalty to his brother still won out, though;
when Ravanan refused, Kumbakarnan went to war on his behalf, and was
killed in battle.
To this date, anyone with a predilection for sleep is still teased with his
name.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 10

The Astrologer of Kudandhai
Beautiful River Ponni claimed the Kudagu Mountains as her birth-place,
and spent her infancy, trickling through its fastnesses. But time passed; she
grew to womanhood, and the time came for her to join her beloved, the
Ocean. She gurgled over rocks, flowed through forests, tumbled off hills
and gushed through vales; her eagerness to reach her destination growing
each moment. As she poured over the plains, it occurred to her that she was
closer than ever to her loved one. Her heart trembled; she swelled with
sheer delight. She went further—two limbs branched out from her, eager to
embrace her lover. She leapt forward, her hands stretched in front of her—
but they simply not seem to be enough. How could they, when such love
overflowed in her heart? Her hands grew, from two to ten, twenty, a
hundred; she extended them all, in a bid to touch Samundra Rajan, the
Ocean King.
Ah, how the mothers of Chozha Nadu delighted in decking out their
daughter, the bride, in nature's finery! They laid out lush, green sarees for
her to wrap herself in; threw fragrant blossoms from every flowering tree
they could find, and scattered breath-taking incense to welcome her arrival.
The sight of Punnai and Kadamba trees on her banks, showering her with
their pearls and rubies—was there anything to ever equal it? Not even the
divine blossoms of the Devas could compare!
Ponni! No young heart could fail to be captivated by your charms; no
maiden would fail to lose her heart, dazzled by your bridal finery! And it
only natural, after all, that they surround you with laughter and delight
when they set sight eyes on your magnificent beauty.
One of the slender golden limbs that Ponni spread out to welcome her
consort, was the Arisilaaru. Tucked away to the south of the vast river, she
flowed silently, concealed by a lush avenue of shady trees. Hers was a

sweet, shy presence; a princess, leading a sheltered life in her anthapuram,
never to appear before strangers. Indeed, outsiders rarely knew of her,
unless they were informed of it. There is nothing on this earth that can
compare to the exquisite loveliness of this young maiden.
May our readers kindly tear themselves away from the lures of the
anthappuram, and follow us in between the dense trees on the banks,
towards the Arisilaaru. Ah, what is this sight that greets us—sweeter than
nectar, and adding charm to such divine beauty?
Who are these young women on a richly carved boat, shaped like a graceful
swan? And who is the lady, seated in the very midst of them? Ah, she is as a
golden moon amidst twinkling stars, and with the presence of one who is
born to rule not just this land, but all the seven worlds! And who might this
tranquil young woman be, seated by her with a veenai in her slender arms?
Each of these young women, it seems, possess a feature that adds to their
loveliness. One has bewitching eyes; another's eyes are an appealing blue.
One's face dazzles like a lotus in full bloom; a fourth has lips that would put
that very same lotus's petals to blush. As for the one who plays the veenai—
one could spend days, just watching her fingers, as delicate as the soft
kaanthal flower, dance upon the instrument.
And what, indeed, of the charms of the songs they sing! The river flows
softly, listening to their merry voices; even parrots and nightingales nestling
in the trees on the banks have fallen silent, in deference to their song. It is
no surprise, therefore, that the humans who listen to them, and much more
capable of appreciating such fine music, should lose themselves in it.
But what do those maidens sing? Ah, here it is:
Marungu vandu sirandhu aarppa,
Manippu aadai athu porthu
Karungayarkkan vizhithu olgi
Nadanthai vazhi Kaveri
Karungayarkkan vizhithu olgi
Nadantha ellaam ninkanavan

Thirunthu sengol valayamai
Arinthen vazhi Kaveri
Poovarsolai mayilaalap
Purindhu kuyilkal isaipaada
Kaamarmaalai arugasaiya
Nadantha ellaam ninkanavan
Naamavelin thiramkande
Arinthen vazhi Kaveri!
Now where have we heard these charming words, before? Indeed, yes—
they are verses from the Silappathikaaram, praising the divine Kaveri and
her peerless beauty. And yet, sung by these young women, they possess an
allure that holds listeners in thrall. They must be Ponni's beloved handmaidens; no one else could sing about her with such fervour. The melody,
expression and emotion that flow from their voices! But no, that is all
nonsense. No one could possibly pick these songs apart and examine them
for what makes them beautiful—it is sheer magic, sorcery that well nigh
bewitches both singers and listeners!
The boat floats along the river, gradually sidles towards a gap in the trees,
and stops at a landing. Two young women step out from within; one is the
majestic young woman we saw before, who possesses the aura of an
Empress; the other is the one who played upon the veenai, with her delicate
fingers. Both were beautiful—but in their own way, with classic features.
One's face resembled a lotus in full bloom; the other had a countenance that
was amore akin a gentle kumudha flower. One had the radiance of a full
moon; the other, the translucent beauty of the same moon at dawn. One
looked stately, like a peacock with its magnificent beauty; the other was a
mild nightingale. One was Lord Indra's divine consort Indrani; the other
possessed the fragile beauty of Manmadhan's beloved, Rathi. One was the

royal River Ganga, a vegavahini in her grace and majesty; the other, the
gentler, bashful Kaveri.
We shall not test our readers' patience any longer, and reveal their identities:
the majestic young woman was King Sundara Chozha's daughter, Princess
Kundhavai; beloved sister of Arulmozhi Varman, who would later gain
immense fame as Raja Raja Chozha. Her titles included that of Ilaiya
Piratti; she was to become a pillar of strength that the Chozha Empire
would one day lean on. She it was who would also raise her brother's son,
Crown Prince Rajendra Chozha into the warrior and great Emperor he was
destined to be.
The other was a princess of the Kodumbalur clan, a faithful vassal of the
Chozha empire; she resided with Princess Kundhavai, as was the custom of
young women of her state. Destiny was to bless her with fortune beyond her
wildest dreams—but that lay in the future. At the moment, she was a
demure, gentle young woman, as yet unaware of the part she would be
called upon to play.
When the young ladies had stepped out of the boat, Kundhavai turned to
look at the others, still in it. “Stay where you are. We shall return in a
naazhigai.”
All the young women in the boat belonged to one royal clan or the other in
the empire; they resided with Princess Kundhavai in Pazhaiyarai as was the
custom; all hoped for her patronage, as the princesses of various vassal
kingdoms. To see her now stroll away, with just one among their group as
her companion, was galling. Disappointment and jealousy warred in their
narrowed eyes.
On the banks stood a chariot at the ready, horses harnessed. Kundhavai
glanced at the young woman beside her. “Vanathi, get in.” When she
obeyed, Kundhavai followed her. The chariot set off at a spanking pace.
“Akka, may I know where we're off to?” asked Vanathi.
“Indeed you may,” answered Kundhavai. “We're about to visit the
Kudandhai astrologer, of course.”
“But—why? What do you wish to ask him?”

“What else but you, my dear? You've been looking pale and dispirited for
months now—not to mention thinner than ever. I'd like to consult him about
your health, and find out when you'll be better.”
“Akka, if you please—there's nothing the matter with me. If this is all you
wish to ask him—may we turn back? Please?”
“No, my girl, we won't. I promise that I shan't say a word about you. Shall
we say, instead, that I wish to consult him about my future?”
“You? But—why would you consult an astrologer about yourself?”
“Why would a girl ever want to consult an astrologer? I wish to ask him
about my marriage, of course. Will I ever wed anyone? Or would I have to
spend the rest of my days as a virgin?”
“Akka, wouldn't you rather ask that of your heart, rather than an astrologer?
All you have to do is nod—princes from all fifty six kingdoms from
Imayam in the north, to Kumari in the south, would be ready fling
themselves at your feet! I daresay they'd arrive in droves from even beyond
the seas. I wonder which prince would be fortunate enough to claim your
hand? But that decision is yours, isn't it, Akka?”
“Let's say, for the sake of argument, that you're right—but I see obstacles
there as well. Should I ever have the good fortune to marry the one I please,
I shall have to make my home with him, in his kingdom. Vanathi, I would
hate to leave Chozha Nadu, with the beautiful River Ponni flowing through
it. You see, I've made a pledge to never leave these lands—”
“I confess I don't see the problem. The one who marries you is bound to fall
at your feet, slave to your every whim and fancy. Order him to make his
home here, and he'll be happy to do so.”
“Ah, talk about bundling a rat in your waistcloth! Do you truly wish me to
confine a prince of another kingdom here? Are you aware of the serious
consequences that might have, my girl?”
“But—every woman must marry some time, mustn't she?”
“And which scripture lays down such a rule, I ask you? Take the poet
Auvaiyaar, for instance. Didn't she live a long life, unattached to any man,
and yet reap such fame?”

“Auvaiyaar was blessed by god, Akka—she received the boon of growing
old in her youth. You haven't a single wrinkle.”
“Have it as you please, then. But I shall marry only a poor soldier in this
very Chozha Nadu—such a one will have no kingdom to rule, no people to
govern. He wouldn't pose conditions about taking me away, either. He
would make his home here, in this empire, quite happily …”
“Then—you wouldn't leave Chozha Nadu, Akka? Ever?”
“Never. Not even if they promised to make me the Queen of Heaven.”
“Now, I'm truly happy.”
“You are? Why?”
“If you leave, you see, I shall have to accompany you—for I can't even
imagine living anywhere, in your absence. But I don't wish to leave Chozha
Nadu either—”
“But you'll have to, wouldn't you? Once you're married?”
“I'm never going to get married, Akka.”
“Good heavens, girl—what of the reams of advice you've been giving me,
about women and matrimony?”
“Our positions are hardly the same, are they?”
“Why, you imp —! Did you really think to fool me with your little ways,
my girl? I know for a fact that you don't care the slightest about these lands
—the Chozha Nadu you desire is now in Eezham, fighting with swords and
spears. Vanathi, did you really believe me to be so ignorant?”
“Akka—do you really think me so silly? How can I—how can an
insignificant little dewdrop on the grass ever aspire to the sun? How would
it ever come to pass?”
“Indeed; there's no comparing them, after all. But the dewdrop does capture
the vast, seething ball of fire within itself, doesn't it?”
“Truly, Akka? Do you really believe that a dewdrop may claim the sun?”
Vanathi asked, all eagerness and delight. But then, abruptly, depression set
in. “The dewdrop does cherish its desires; it succeeds in capturing the sun
too. But how does it all end? The dewdrop receives the punishment it richly

deserves for even nurturing such desires—it melts away within moments, in
the scorching sunlight!”
“Wrong, Vanathi. The sun does return the dewdrop's affections—he loves
her in the only way possible; he takes her to himself, and never lets her
return to the earth again. You see, he doesn't really want other men to cast
their lustful eyes on her, for she belongs only to him. When night falls, he
releases her—haven't we seen fresh dewdrops on the grass, each morning?”
“These are merely words to pacify me, Akka.”
“So you do admit that something troubles your heart. And you've been
insisting all these days that it was nothing of the sort! Now you know why I
wish to consult the astrologer.”
“And if I am troubled,” Vanathi stared at the scenes outside, and heaved a
great sigh. “What would be the point of asking him about it?”
***
The astrologer had chosen to have his dwelling in the vicinity of a Kali
temple, in a corner of Kudandhai, well away from the bustle; it was possible
to arrive at his home without entering the city at all. The chariot followed a
well-appointed path; from the ease with which the charioteer negotiated the
route, it seemed fairly obvious that he had done so many times before, and
knew it like the back of his hand.
Their arrival appeared to be expected; the astrologer and his disciple stood
in readiness at his home's entrance. The moment the princesses alighted, the
astrologer came forward and bade them welcome, deference in every pore
of his body. “Welcome, Your Highness! I am honoured to have you, the
embodiment of Kalaimagal and Thirumagal, into my humble abode. That
you should grace it a second time by your noble presence is truly a
privilege!”
“Ayya, may we be sure that no one else will try to visit you for the duration
of our consultation?” asked Kundhavai.
“Certainly, my lady. Nobody seeks me, these days. And why should they?
Your father, the illustrious King Sundara Chozha rules with such benign
grace that there is no want, need, hunger or disease. His subjects lead a
happy and fulfilling life. Why would they need to consult astrologers?”

“In other words, I'm consulting you because I'm in difficulties.”
“Never, my lady! Who in this land would ever dare to imply that the
Pazhaiyarai lord's noble daughter, blessed with the navanidhis, the nine
kinds of wealth, is plagued by trouble? Doubtless, it is to succour me that
my lady has decided to visit my little hut—for, with every citizen of Chozha
Nadu living a satisfying life, it is I who am now deprived of an income, and
therefore, in great difficulties,” the astrologer recovered, with considerable
aplomb. “May I request the princesses to kindly step into my home? It is an
insult to your noble selves to stand here, at my entrance, for so long!”
Kundhavai turned to the charioteer. “Make sure the chariot stands under the
banyan tree by the temple.” She and Vanathi entered the astrologer's home.
The astrologer paused for a moment, to speak to his disciple. “My boy,
guard the entrance with your life. Make sure that not a soul enters the
house, until our visitors leave.”
The home itself might be of humble dimensions, but it was obvious that the
astrologer had taken great pains to appoint it in a manner suitable for his
royal visitors. A charming painting of the Goddess was placed in an alcove
in one wall; two seats were placed on the floor, in readiness. A kuthuvilakku
cast its golden light around the hall; while artistic kolams were drawn
around the walls and floor. In addition, palm-leaves with intricate drawings
of astrological signs were strewn about everywhere.
The astrologer took his seat, once the princesses had done so. “My lady
must graciously apprise me of the reason for her visit.”
“Wouldn't you be able to glean my reasons from your palm-leaves?”
“Very well.” The astrologer duly closed his eyes. His lips mumbled
something, as though he were chanting mantras. “You are here, my lady, to
consult me about this young lady's horoscope,” he said a while later,
opening his eyes. “Goddess Parasakthi's divine grace informs me so. Is this
true?”
“Wonderful! Words fail me, Ayya, when I try to praise your powers. Indeed,
yes—my purpose in visiting you today was to seek a consultation about this
young lady. She came to the Pazhaiyarai palace a year ago, and you would
have been hard put to find a happier, carefree girl—she sang and danced all
day; for the first few months, she was the most cheerful among my

handmaidens; full of spirit and enthusiasm. But something has changed: she
hasn't been the same, for the past four months. She tires easily and sits as
though in a trance, for hours. There's never a smile to be seen on her face,
but when I ask if something is wrong, she insists she's fine. I daren't face
her family if they visit us and make enquiries about her health!”
“My lady, this young woman is the beloved daughter of the illustrious
Kodumbalur Velir the Younger, is she not? Is her name Vanathi?”
“Why, you seem to know everything about her!”
“I have her horoscope too, somewhere about. I remember collecting it,
amongst others. Pray, wait a while, while I find it.” The astrologer opened
an old box nearby, and began rootling about in it. Soon, he picked up a few
palm-leaves from within, and read their contents carefully.
Glossary:
Silappathikaaram: One of the five great epics of Tamil, this work is
supposed o have been written sometime around the 5th or 6th century AD,
by Ilangovadigal. The story revolves around the lives of Kovalan and
Kannaki, a young couple whose lives go haywire upon Kovalan's liaison
with a courtesan, Madhavi. Silappathikaaram derives its name from the
ornament Silambu (in fact, it is often referred to by this name), which is a
central part of the story, and is renowned for its classic verses of romance,
betrayal, tragedy—but also for its descriptive verses on nature, particularly
the Kaveri.
Akka: A term used to address elder sisters, both biological and otherwise.
Kuthuvilakku: Large lamps, usually made of brass, and with five or seven
lamp-wicks.
Kolam: Intricate rice-flour drawings usually drawn at the entrance of homes
and sometimes, within as well.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 11

Explosive Entrances
Kumbakonam is so famous these days that it has earned a place even in
English dictionaries—but at the time of our story, it went by the name of
Kudandhai or Kudamooku, and was much renowned for its temples and
religious connections. In addition to all these attractions, there was the fact
that the Kudandhai astrologer had chosen to make it his home, as well.
A little to the south-west of this city lay Pazhaiyarai, the provisional capital
of the Chozha Empire, a magnificent sight with towers, maadams and
temple gopurams piercing the sky.
It was one of the astrologer's missions in life, to collect and analyze the
horoscope of every royal who resided in this majestic city's several palaces;
accordingly, the Kodumbalur Princess's birth-chart had made its way into
his collection as well.
He gazed down at this important document for a while. He looked keenly
into Vanathi's face. Then, he went back to gazing at the horoscope, and
again, at the young woman. But though he spent a good many minutes
switching endless gazes between palm-leaf and princess, not a single word
did he utter.
“Well, Jothidar?” asked Kundhavai, finally. “Are you ever going to grace
us with your predictions?”
“What do I say, my lady? I recall picking up this particular horoscope once
before, but I was so astounded by what I saw in it, that I could not believe
my eyes. I doubted that such things could even exist. But now—when I
look at both the gracious lady in question and her horoscope, I cannot help
but gape at it!”

“Do, by all means, gape to your heart's content—but will you deign to tell
us something, when you're done with it?”
“Ah, this is a horoscope that fairly overflows with good fortune, my lady. If
you will not mind my telling you so—it is, in several respects, a shade
better than even yours! I have never seen destiny and fortune come together
in such an excellent fashion!”
A smile appeared on Kundhavai's face; Vanathi went pink with
embarrassment. “Akka, I don't see how he can call this ill-fated creature the
world's most fortunate woman! Is this how he usually predicts anything?”
“What is this that you say, Amma? I declare—if any of my predictions are
wrong, I shall give up my profession!”
“Kindly don't swear any such pledge, Ayya—if only to mumble a few kind
words to anyone who comes to you. Vanathi's seized by doubt, as all your
predictions, so far, have been vague in the extreme.”
“You wish to know something specific, my lady? Here it is, then: four
months ago, an event happened that could have been misconstrued as a
terrible omen—but it was no such thing. In fact, that very event laid the
foundations for this fortunate damsel's magnificent destiny!”
“There!—what did I tell you, Vanathi?” exulted Kundhavai.
“It looks like you've already informed him of everything that needs to be
said,” murmured that young woman.
“Would you just listen to this one's words, Ayya?”
“Indeed, she may say whatever she pleases. When she marries the king of
kings—”
“Now that is the way to talk. What young woman wouldn't be delighted to
learn about her marriage?”
“Precisely my opinion as well, my lady. I could not very well begin with
marriage, could I? You would chastise me a lecherous old man, then!”
“When and from where is this gracious young lady's husband to be found?”
queried Kundhavai. “How may we identify him? Would you be able to
predict all this?”

“Why not, Amma? All things are possible, when it comes to horoscopes!”
And the astrologer bent his head studiously towards Vanathi's birth-chart
once again. Of course, he may have just been pretending to study it—but of
that, we shall never know the truth.
Presently, he raised his head. “Ammani, the one who is to wed this young
lady does not need to come from very far away; he lives very near her, to
tell the truth. But this warrior of warriors is not in this country at the
moment—he has journeyed to a land beyond the seas.”
Kundhavai glanced at Vanathi, who lowered her head, in a bid to contain
the thrill of delight that coursed through her. She was not very successful;
her face gave away her ecstasy.
“And —? Who is he? What is his clan? Is there any way to know these
things?”
“Indeed there is. The man fortunate enough to wed this young lady would
be blessed with the lines of a conch and discus in his palms, Amma!”
Kundhavai glanced at Vanathi again. That young woman stared studiously,
at the ground.
“In that case, wouldn't her hands have some sort of sign too? A line that
corresponds to his?”
“My lady, I wonder if you have ever had occasion to look at her soles—”
“Good grief—are you truly suggesting that I fall at her feet?”
“No, Amma, that was not what I meant. But it is entirely true that well-born
ladies, crown princesses, queens. Empresses and others will yearn, some
day, for an opportunity to lay their heads at this young woman's feet!”
“Akka, did you really bring me here just to listen to this old man make fun
of me?” retorted Vanathi, this time, genuinely angry. “Let's leave, please!”
“Hush, now. Why do you fly into a rage? What does it matter what he says
—?”
“But it does, my lady. I do not spout predictions indiscriminately—only
what this horoscope says. You may have heard court poets sing of “lotus
feet”—and perhaps you thought they were soft words meant for

gratification. But do, if you can, look at the soles of this young woman's
sole. You will find the lines of a lotus adorning them.”
“Enough, Jothidar! Any more and she might grab my hands and drag me
away from here by sheer force of will. Do tell me us something now, about
her husband.”
“Ah, certainly! The man who weds this damsel is a warrior among warriors;
he will meet his enemies face to face, and destroy them all in a hundred
battles. Vaagai garlands of victory will descend upon his neck by the
dozens, and he will be an Emperor among Emperors. Thousands of kings
will lay their heads at his feet, and he will rule from his bejeweled throne,
for years—”
“I don't believe you,” put in Kundhavai, her face a tumultuous blend of
eagerness, delight, doubt and concern. “How can this ever come to pass?”
“He's just rattling off the first thing that comes in to his head,” interjected
Vanathi. “Perhaps he believes these predictions will make you happy.”
“Your disbelief does not matter in the least, Amma. One day, you will
realize the truth of my predictions. All I ask is that when that time comes,
kindly do not forget this poor astrologer—”
“Akka—shall we leave?” Tears trembled on the lashes of Vanathi's dark
eyes.
“Just a moment—you may do so, once I have told you this: The warrior
who weds this princess is about to face a great many dangers, and untold
disasters. He will incur the ire of powerful enemies—”
“Ayyo!”
“But in the end, every single one of his foes will be defeated; every
calamity will dissipate, like dust in the wind. This young lady's prince will
vanquish all obstacles, and ascend to greatness unheard of, among men. My
lady—do not take offense at what I am about to tell you; I am an old man,
and believe I have the right denied to youth. Do, please, observe this young
woman's abdomen, if you can. And if you do not find the lines of an aal
leaf in it, I swear I shall give up my profession!”
“What's the significance of a banyan leaf?”

“Do we not know the Lord who rests on a banyan leaf, my lady? The
Kodumbalur princess is truly blessed; she is to have the honour of giving
birth to a boy who will be the image of Thirumaal himself, on earth. Her
husband might be burdened with obstacles, catastrophes and disasters, but
her son—ah! He shall be the very incarnation of god on earth! Nothing shall
be beyond him. Everything he touches will turn to gold; he shall own and
rule all the lands he sets foot on; the tiger flag will flutter gloriously,
wherever he casts his sight. The young man borne of this princess will lead
armies that flow over the land in vast numbers, just as the Ponni overflows
its banks and washes over the land. Goddess Jayalakshmi, Dive Benefactor
of the Victorious, will bow to him with respect; his will be the hand that
brings prosperity and fame to this land; this empire will know its greatest
glory under his magnificent reign; the Chozha dynasty will be renowned all
over the three worlds—and he will be the reason for it!”
Kundhavai sat opposite him all this while, her eyes burning into his,
drinking in the astrologer's every fervent word as though her life depended
on it.
A feeble voice brought her back to earth. “Akka?” Kundhavai turned,
startled.
“I—I don't feel—I can't—” Vanathi stuttered, and crumpled to the floor,
unconscious.
Kundhavai sat up briskly. “Ayya, some water, if you please.” She raised
Vanathi from the floor and settled her in her lap. The astrologer duly arrived
with water; Kundhavai received it, and sprinkled a few drops on her
companion's face.
“Nothing to worry, Amma,” reassured the astrologer.
“Indeed. She's been making a habit of fainting away—it's been five or six
times, already. Mark my words: she'll wake up in a few moments, and ask
me if we're on earth, or Kailasam!”
Then, she turned her attention to him—and her voice went very low. “I
came here, Ayya, to consult you about something important. I've been
hearing disturbing talk among people, lately—towns and cities are full of
news that upsets me. I see a comet in the sky too, these days—do such

omens have any import? Will they truly spell calamity for the empire?
Perhaps—perhaps ill fortune truly is upon us?”
“My lady—kindly do not ask me about empires, affairs of state or kingly
dominions. Such things do not possess horoscopes; neither do they lend
themselves to predictions. Perhaps the only men who can divine their
futures are sages, saints and other yogis with the power to predict such
things. I am but a poor astrologer with meager resources; such things are
beyond me. Stars, charts, planets and moon become powerless, before the
might of an empire and its machinations …”
“How very diplomatic, Ayya. Cleverly phrased, too. Predicting an empire's
future might be beyond your meager means—but surely not those of my
father and brothers? Divining their futures would be the same as divining
the empire's, wouldn't it?”
“Certainly, Amma, but that is a task for another day. In general, these are
hazardous times for all of us, filled with confusion and danger. It would
serve us well to exercise great caution.”
“My father's move from Pazhaiyarai to Thanjavur worries me greatly.”
“I said this before, Amma; a great adversity is about to befall the Maharaja
—indeed, these are trying times for all your family. They will face the
gravest dangers. By Goddess Durga's grace, though, every single stroke of
ill fortune shall dissipate, and the fates will smile again.”
A frail voice reached them, at that moment. “Akka? Where are we?”
Vanathi gazed up from where she lay in Kundhavai's lap, eyes wide, like a
flower unfurling its delicate petals, lids fluttering like a bird's.
“My heart's dearest! The celestial Pushpaka Vimanam hasn't arrived to
whisk us away to heaven, unfortunately; we're doomed to be on earth for a
while; more's the pity. Do get up, now—we'll have to do with our own
paltry chariot and horses, to return to the palace.”
Vanathi sat up slowly. “Did I faint?”
“Certainly not, my love. You simply decided to take a nap in my lap for a
while. I even sang a lullaby—didn't the lilting notes fall on your charming
ears?”

“Pray—pray don't be angry, Akka. I couldn't help myself. My head spun so
—”
“I'm not surprised your head spun a pretty dance—mine would have too, if
this wily astrologer had rattled off such dazzling predictions to me.”
“Dazzling predictions—Akka, you don't really think I'd believe such things,
do you?”
“Regardless of what you believe, my dear, you did succeed in frightening
the astrologer out of his wits! I've decided never to take such a little coward
anywhere, ever again—”
“I did tell you that I didn't want to come here, Akka. But you said—”
“My fault, of course. Now, get up. Will my lady take a few steps to the front
door—or must I tuck you onto my hip?”
“Oh, no, please! I can walk, by myself.”
“Just a moment, Amma. Kindly accept Devi's prasadham, before you
leave.” The astrologer began to gather his palm-leaves and tie them up.
“Jothidar, you've predicted so much of my future—but you haven't said
anything about Akka,” spoke up Vanathi.
“Amma, I have predicted her future, as well. Besides, there is nothing I can
tell Ilaiya Piratti that she does not already know. What more?”
“The warrior who is to wed Akka—”
“A Nightmare to Foes!” cut in Kundhavai.
“And why not? Of course, he would be the greatest of them all, a mighty
prince who is—”
“– so handsome that he's the embodiment of all thirty-two aspects of the
Samudhrika Lakhshanam; rivals Brihaspathi in brains, equals Saraswathi in
arts; would compete with Manmadhan for his looks and Arjuna, in valour!”
“Ilaiya Piratti's prince is to come soon, isn't he?” asked Vanathi eagerly.
“When? And where will he be from?”
“Indeed, he will arrive soon, my lady. Very, very soon.”

“Ah, but the question is—how will he make his superb entrance? Will he
stomp in on an elephant? Trot in on a horse? Clatter by in a chariot? Tramp
by on foot?” quipped Kundhavai, gaily. “Or simply crash through the roof
like a god and reveal his divine presence?”
“There —! I can hear a horse's hooves!” exclaimed Vanathi.
“Such excellent hearing, my dear, to catch something that doesn't exist.”
“I'm not teasing you, Akka—do listen!”
And indeed, they did hear a horse clattering along the street at a furious
pace.
“What of it? This is Kudandhai city, after all; horses must be commonplace,
on the streets,” explained Kundhavai.
“No Akka—I believe the horse is coming here!”
“You and your silly fantasies. Get up now; time to leave.”
Precisely at this moment, a clamour of voices reached them from the
entrance. A fierce altercation seemed to be in progress, interspersed with
shouts and a cacophony of sounds.
“This is the astrologer's home, isn't it?”
“Yes—and you are?”
“Is the astrologer in?”
“You can't go in right now.”
“I will.”
“I won't let you.”
“I must see the astrologer.”
“Later.”
“I have no time for later—I will see him now!”
“Dei—dei—stop! Stop at once!”
“Shoo! Get away—or I'll mow you down —!”
“Ayya, please do not enter the house! Please do not —!”

Dadaar! The door flung open with a crash. A young man made an
explosive entrance into the room. Another man was almost at heels,
catching him by his shoulders in a vain bid to pull him away. The young
man wrenched himself from the latter and took a forceful step across the
threshold, and into the room.
Our readers may have guessed the identity of this intrepid youngster by
now—it was, indeed, our valiant Vandhiyathevan.
The eyes of all three, within the room, focused themselves on the new
entrant at once.
Vandhiyathevan, in turn, directed his attention on those within. No, that
would not be quite correct. His eyes fastened onto only one person in the
room—and even then, he did not quite manage to see Princess Kundhavai
all at once.
He took in her fair countenance, radiant as the golden full moon. Ah, but
not even all her face, at the same time! He saw her lips, gleaming red
corals, parted slightly in surprise; he saw her eyes—large, brilliant, and
brimming with laughter, mischief, astonishment and yes, the aura of
majesty that pervaded her; every perfect eyelash, and brows that curved
gently over them; the forehead, delicately tinted in ivory; rosy cheeks,
dimpling in a smile; a slender neck, with the silken smoothness of a conch,
translucent in its beauty.
He saw all these at the same, as separate images. And that was how they
fixed themselves in his mind, as well—with a startling, brilliant clarity.
All this had happened within the space of a few seconds. Now,
Vandhiyathevan seemed to shake himself, and turned to glare at the
astrologer's disciple. “Why, you little—why couldn't you have warned me
that there were females inside —! I wouldn't have barged in if I'd known—”
and he pushed away the man almost roughly, retreating in some confusion
towards the front entrance.
He did, however, seize the opportunity of darting one last glance at
Kundhavai, before he left.
“Good grief—it sounds as though a tempest had just wrecked its havoc and
blown itself out,” sighed the princess.

“Not yet—do listen,” pointed out Vanathi.
Vandhiyathevan, it seemed, was still locked in a fierce verbal duel with the
disciple.
“Ayya, who might this be?” asked Kundhavai.
“I do not know, my lady. He does not seem to be from these parts. Looks to
be quite a ruffian too.”
Abruptly, Kundhavai seemed to recall something—and went into merry
peals of laughter.
“Why do you laugh, Akka?”
“If you must know, I remembered what we'd been discussing about my
future husband and his entry—if he would stomp by in an elephant, come in
a horse, or drop through the roof!”
This time, Vanathi was hard put to control her laughter as well.
Their collective mirth rang through the hall, flowing in merry waves
through the doorway, and drowned the argument outside.
The astrologer seemed lost in thought, as he provided the princesses with
kungumam.
The ladies rose, took their leave, and walked out of the house; the astrologer
followed.
Vandhiyathevan, who moved to the side the moment they appeared upon
the entrance, snatched the chance to explain his behaviour. “My apologies,”
he announced, in a loud voice. “I did not realize that there were ladies
within—this idiot never thought to mention it. Had I known, I would never
have made such hasty entrance—I apologize, once again!”
Kundhavai glanced up at him, face alight with good humour. Mischief and
laughter mingled with a certain undeniable dignity, in her expressive eyes.
She spoke not a word, but took one of Vanathi's hands instead, and walked
towards the chariot, under the banyan tree.
“Kudandhai's womenfolk don't seem to have a smidgen of manners,”
Vandhiyathevan's loud complaint floated towards them, from a distance.

“Not even a pleasant word to a man who takes the effort to speak to them?
Terrible!”
The charioteer stood in readiness, having harnessed his horses. The
princesses climbed in; he took his place at the front. The equipage sped
away, towards the banks of the Arisilaaru.
Vandhiyathevan stood watching the chariot, until it vanished into the
distance.
Glossary:
Kailasam: Heavenly abode of Lord Shiva.
Ammani: Honourific, used to address women.
Prasadham: Offerings placed before the deity, and later distributed among
devotes, or visitors.
Kungumam: Vermilion. Connected with all things auspicious and
especially to women, it was (and still is) the practice to offer it to women,
both virgins and married, when they took their leave after a visit. It is also
considered de rigueur to offer it before they rise from their seats—which
explains why Kundhavai and Vanathi rose only after they accepted the
kungumam from the astrologer.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 12

Nandhini
Ah, yes. We left Vandhiyathevan on the banks of the Kollidam, safely
inside a boat, didn't we? Now we're honour-bound to tell our readers how
he made an explosive entry at the Kudandhai astrologer's home, of all
places.
The Saivite who had objected in no uncertain terms to Azhwarkkadiyaan's
getting into the boat, kept his silence patience until they were well across
the river, and then turned to our young man. “Thambi, it was on your
account that I even let this one get into the boat. Order him never to utter
that eight-letter word in my presence—or I shall task these boatmen to push
him into these waters! They are my men, you see.”
“Well, honoured Nambi?” queried Vandhiyathevan. “Did your sacred ears
get the message?”
“I am content never to mention the blessed eight-letter name—as long as
that one never utters the five-lettered blasphemy,” retorted
Azhwarkkadiyaan.
“Who is this idiot, who dares me to never chant that divine five-letter word,
the Panchakshara Mantram of Siva Peruman himself?” thundered the
Saivite, in righteous anger.
“Katroonaip pootti kadalir paaichinum
Natrunaiyavadhu Namachivayave!”
[Bind me to a stone pillar and throw me into the oceans—and I shall still
chant Namachivaaya, in praise of Lord Siva, who is always by my side!]
Azhwarkkadiyaan, never to be outdone, sang in turn:
“Naadinen naadi naan kandukondein

Narayana ennum naamam!”
[I searched within myself, and I found Him—the blessed name of Narayana,
the Supreme Being!]
“Siva Siva!” growled the Saivite, and stuck his fingers in his ears. He took
them out only when the Vaishnavite was done.
“Do listen to this Saivite go on and on about his precious God, thambi,”
began Azhwarkkadiyaan. “He complains so much about Thirumaal's name
even falling on his ears—but doesn't this very Kollidam come down to us
only after washing the divine feet of the Lord who resides in Srirangam?
And Siva Peruman, of course, realizes how blessed these waters are, which
is why he practically performs penance, submerged in them, in
Thiruvaanaikkaval temple, grateful to be given this honour—”
The Saivite pounced on Nambi with a roar, barely allowing him a word
more. The two began a wild tussle in one end of the boat, and when it
looked like it might capsize, Vandhiyathevan and the boatmen intervened,
pulling them apart.
“It seems, my devout men, that you wish to dive headfirst into this raging
Kollidam and ascend moksham straightaway,” said Vandhiyathevan
severely. “I, however, still have a great many things to accomplish in the
world, and wish to stay, if you please.”
“I am not sure about moksham,” averred one of the boatmen. “But they are
sure to reach the stomachs of crocodiles. Look over there!”
They followed his finger—and saw a crocodile gaping wide, its terrifyingly
sharp teeth clearly visible.
“I'm not afraid of them in the least,” declared Azhwarkkadiyaan. “Don't I
have the divinely powerful Narayanamurthy, who rescued the elephant
Gajendra from the clutches of a crocodile, to sweep me away from danger?”
“Only if he finds the time to actually tear himself away from the saris of
Brindavan's Gopika women,” said the Saivite, tone dripping with sarcasm.
“Or, perhaps, Siva Peruman is caught in difficulties, like the time he granted
all those silly boons to the demon Basmaasuran, and came whining for
assistance. And perhaps Thirumaal has hastened to his help,” mused
Azhwarkkadiyaan.

“This Vaishnavite does not seem to remember how Thirumaal's arrogance
was destroyed, during Siva Peruman's destruction of the Three Worlds,”
retorted the Saivite.
“I really don't understand why you must quarrel endlessly, this way,”
complained Vandhiyathevan. “Why don't you choose your favourites and
worship them in peace?”
***
As to why exactly the Saivite and Azhwarkkadiyaan were at each other's
throats, or the religious argument that ended almost in a full-fledged fight at
Veera Narayanapuram—perhaps it would be better for us to reveal to our
readers, the reason for such fervour among the local populace, in those
days.
For more than six hundred years, Jainism and Buddhism had reigned
supreme, as the religions of favour, in the Thamizh lands. Many were the
benefits reaped as a result of the prevalence of these two ruling faiths:
sculpture, art, poetry, dance and prose flourished. Later, it was the time of
Azhwars and Nayanmars, belonging to Vaishnavite and Saivite traditions, to
begin the Bhakthi movement in earnest, with their divine beautiful songs in
simple, chaste Thamizh.
Their efforts to bring their faiths to the masses proved to be extraordinarily
powerful; sculpture and music played a great part in their work, and many
chose to sing the Azhwars' beautiful pasurams, and the work of three
celebrated saints of Saivism, compiled as Thevaram verses, set to charming
music, almost celestial in their beauty. Such songs melted the hearts of
listeners with their exquisite loveliness, raising religious ardour to almost a
fever-pitch. Those temples that had songs of Azhwars and the three Saivite
saints dedicated to them attained a new degree of respect, conferred as they
had been, with a signal honour. Many were the houses of worship that had
been built with wood and bricks thus far; now, they were rebuilt in stone,
never to be destroyed. Vijayalaya Chozha it was who took up this
monumental work; his heirs and others of the Chozha royal family would
later expand upon it.
Meanwhile, neighbouring Kerala was not exempt from momentous events
either. A tiny village called Kaaladi witnessed the birth of a saint; at a very

tender age, he renounced the world and became an ascetic. The pursuit of
knowledge drove him to learn the languages of the North; soon, he was an
expert in the Bhagavan Gita, the Upanishads and Brahma Sutra—these
works formed the basis for his much acclaimed treatises, especially when
he later hoisted the flag of Advaitha philosophy victoriously, upon the peak
of many such theological debates, besting his peers. His proficiency in the
Northern languages aided him in his travels across the length and breadth of
Bharathavarsha; he established eight seats, or monasteries that propounded
Advaitha philosophy in earnest. Monks and ascetics, captivated by his
theories and treatises, traversed the lands, expounding them to eager
audiences.
Approximately 980 years ago, around the time this story was set in
Thamizhagam, religious fervour had peoples' imaginations in a feverish
grip. As much as this was advantageous in some ways, it cannot be denied
that a good many adverse elements also found a way to spread their
poisonous tendrils around the population. Fierce Vaishnavaites and Saivites
rose up everywhere, with their thorny arguments; Advaitha philosophers
pitched in to add their mite. Religious debates often turned into ugly fistfights.
There is, in fact, a rather quaint story that illustrates the Saiva-Vaishnava
wars of those days beautifully:
Once, a staunch Vaishnavite walked along the towering temple walls of the
Siva abode in Thiruvaanaikkaval. Suddenly, a stone dropped on his head. It
was a sharp one, and the resulting gash began bleeding at once. The
Vaishnavite craned up his neck—to see a crow perched on the temple tower.
He guessed, at once, that the bird's awkward perch must have dislodged one
of the stones in the aged, crumbling vimanam.
Instantly, every sign of distress left him; he even forgot the blood flowing
freely from his head. “Devout crow, you must be a staunch Vaishnavite
from Srirangam!” he crowed. “Destroy this Thiruvaanaikkaval temple
tower at once!”
This was how things stood, at that point, in Thamizhagam. Learning these
circumstances will aid our readers immensely, in understanding this story.

The boat reached the opposite banks. “Go to hell!” The Saivite hurled a last,
liberal curse at Azhwarkkadiyaan's head, and went his way. The Kadambur
soldier who had accompanied Vandhiyathevan thus far left as well; he
would procure a horse in nearby Thiruppanandaal.
Left to fend for themselves, Vandhiyathevan and Azhwarkkadiyaan sat
down on the banks, under an arasu tree. Hundreds of birds perched in the
numerous branches of the sprawling tree, chirping and twittering in
enthusiastic tones.
Both felt that the other possessed a good deal of information; both tried to
get the other to blurt out what they knew. The result was that they spent a
good deal of time talking in endless circles, circumventing one topic after
another, yet moving inexorably towards their respective secrets.
“Well, thambi?” Azhwarkkadiyaan made the opening gambit. “You did go
to the Kadambur palace, didn't you? And you never thought to take me
along!”
“It was all I could do to get in myself, Nambi.”
“Indeed? How did you enter, then? Or perhaps you never did?”
“Oh I did, all right. When have I ever backed out of something I set my
heart on? The sentries at the gates did their best to throw me out—but I
spurred my horse on and practically dashed in. They tried to bar my way—
but every single one of them crumpled to the ground around me. And my
friend Kandamaran arrived to escort me in before they could gather their
simple wits and close in on me.”
“I thought that it might have happened that way. You're courageous, thambi!
And then? Who were the guests? Did you see?”
“So many that I lost count. And all of them such great men too! I couldn't
recognize all of them. There was Pazhuvettarayar, though. And his wife.
Ah, the beauty of that young woman! Where am I to find the words to
describe her?”
“You saw her, then?”
“Did I not! My friend Kandamaran practically dragged me to his palace's
anthappuram. That's where I caught sight of her—and let me tell you: she
fairly dazzled down every other woman in that place. Her face shone like a

radiant full moon, amongst all those dark-skinned ladies. All the celestial
beauties—Rambhai, Urvasi, Thilothamai, even Indra's queen Indrani,
Chandrani, hah, they're all nothing to her!”
“Well! This is describing her indeed. And what happened next? Did they
perform the Kuravai Koothu?”
“Indeed they did. And very well too. I thought of you, then.”
“How unfortunate that I couldn't attend! What else?”
“Well, the Velan Dance, for one. The Devaralan and Devaratti came on
stage and put up an aggressive performance.”
“What about the sannadham? Were they possessed? Any predictions?”
“Ah, certainly! “There will be rains; the land will flourish; all our deepest
desires will be fulfilled …”
“Is that all?”
“I believe there was something about royal matters—but I wasn't really
listening.”
“Ah, but you should have, thambi! How unfortunate that you didn't. See,
you're a youngster; a valiant and intelligent one at that. You must keep your
eyes and ears open, when it comes to royal affairs.”
“Indeed, you speak the truth. I thought so myself, this morning.”
“Eh? Why only this morning?”
“Because Kandamaran and I were chatting as we travelled towards the
Kollidam, and he happened to mention something about their famous
visitors. Apparently they gathered after I'd gone to bed last night, and
discussed some very secret royal matters.”
“What royal matters?”
“Kandamaran was very vague about it, so I've really no idea. All he would
say was that something momentous would happen soon, and he'd tell me all
about it. Very mysterious, he was. Nambi, would you happen to know
anything about it?”
“What about?”

“There's been talk everywhere about strange things happenings, hasn't
there? About the comet in the sky—and how that portends terrible
misfortune to the Chozha throne … people are discussing all this as far
away as the Thondai Mandalam. Apparently, several great men have been
gathering and considering who might be next in line to the throne. What
about you, Nambi? Who do you think will be the next Emperor?”
“I'm afraid I'm not knowledgeable about such things, thambi. What have I
to do with royalty? I'm a Vaishnavite; the servant of devout Azhwars who
sing the praises of Thirumaal. All I do is follow in their footsteps and go on
pilgrimages.”
As if on cue, he began to sing the pasuram, Thirukkanden Ponmeni Kanden
—upon which Vandhiyathevan cut in without compunction. “Do me a
favour, Nambi, and kindly shut up.”
“This is a divine Thamizh pasuram, thambi—why would you tell me to
stop?”
“Devout Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi—I find myself entertaining a suspicion.
May I reveal it to you?”
“By all means.”
“You wouldn't take a swing at me with that stick of yours, will you?”
“Dare I even think of such a thing?”
“All this devotion—your piety, arguments about Thirumaal, being a staunch
Vaishnavite, these pasurams and the sacred symbols on your body—I say
that every single one of these is just a clever disguise.”
“Ayyo! How could you? Good god, sacrilege! Blasphemy!”
“Blasphemy indeed! Ah come now, Nambi—all this is just a ruse to cover
up your lust, isn't it? I've come across men like you before—insanely
enamoured of women. I wonder what you see in them? I confess your
obsession is beyond me. For myself, I hate their very sight.”
“It's true that certain men have nothing on their minds but women—but
kindly don't lump me with them, thambi. I'm no lustful idiot masquerading
as a devotee. Your assumption is unjust.”

“In that case, why ask me to deliver a message to the young woman in the
palanquin? Harbouring romantic feelings for a married woman too! That's
why you wanted to come to the Kadambur palace, didn't you? It wouldn't
do to deny it.”
“I won't. What I do deny is your reason for why I wanted to come to the
palace. I had my reasons—but that's a very long story indeed.”
“Well, considering the horse isn't here yet, you may as well tell me.”
“If you think it's just an amusing fable—don't. Every part of it is true. Are
you sure you want to listen to it?”
“Only if you wish to tell me.”
“I believe I will, even if I'm rather a hurry at the moment. After all, I may
need something else of you, some other time—and then you'll help me,
won't you?”
“If it's an honourable request, yes. However, you needn't tell me anything if
you don't want to.”
“But I must. The young woman who is caught in the terrible clutches of that
ogre Hiranyasuran—I mean Pazhuvettarayar—her name is Nandhini. Her
tale will astonish you, I promise. You will practically explode with anger at
the injustice of it —!”
With this preamble, Azhwarkkadiyaan began Nandhini's history.
***
A village on the banks of the Vaigai River in Pandiya Nadu was
Azhwarkkadiyaan's birthplace; his family was steeped in poverty—but for
all that, every one of them was a staunch Vaishnavite.
Once, his father went to the flower gardens on the river banks, and
stumbled upon an infant girl, lying all alone. No one claimed her; he
brought her home. The infant was a charming, lovely child, and the family
instantly fell in love with her. They had found her in a beautiful
nandavanam; the name Nandhini thus suited her, and she swiftly became a
much-loved member of their family. Azhwarkkadiyaan, for his part,
considered her his own sister, and cherished her.

As Nandhini grew, so did her devotion towards Thirumaal. Neighbours
predicted that she would become another Andal, following in the footsteps
of that devout lady and give herself up to god and a life of divine service.
Azhwarkkadiyaan believed in this, more than anyone else. Such was his
affection towards the young girl that he took the responsibility of raising
her, upon his father's death. Brother and sister went on pilgrimages, visiting
temple after temple, on a mission to spread Vaishnavism. The sight of a
young Nandhini, wearing a thulasi garland, singing pasurams in her
exquisite voice, was enough to melt the hardest heart.
Once, Azhwarkkadiyaan left on a journey to Thiruvengadam. It was a while
before he returned—and this was when disaster struck Nandhini's life.
The unceasing war between Pandiyas and Chozhas had escalated to one
final, bloody battle in the vicinity of Madurai—and the Pandiya armies
suffered a crushing defeat. Veera Pandiya lay on the battlefield, grievously
wounded; some of his closest aides found him among the massacred bodies,
and tried to save his life. In the thick of the night, they brought him to
Nandhini's home. The young woman saw the badly wounded king, and, felt
her heart stir with pity. She tried her very best to aid him—but Chozha
soldiers had already caught the scent of the hidden Pandiya king, and
surrounded her home. They stormed the dwelling, killed Veera Pandiya—
and Nandhini, whose luminous beauty had bewitched Pazhuvettarayar, was
promptly imprisoned.
Three years had flown since these events. Try as he might,
Azhwarkkadiyaan had never been able to see Nandhini again. Ever since
then, he had used every means in his possession to meet her at least once, to
speak with her, and if she were unhappy, to rescue her somehow, from her
present circumstances. Until this moment, though, all his efforts had been in
vain.
Vandhiyathevan's heart melted at this moving recital. For one brief moment,
he even considered revealing to Azhwarkkadiyaan that the palanquin's
occupant had actually been Prince Madhuranthakan, and not Nandhini—but
some instinct seemed to prevent him. What if, he wondered, this entire tale
had been one of Azhwarkkadiyaan's carefully constructed fantasies?

The thought made him refrain from saying anything about the events at
Kadambur, and his own midnight adventures.
In the distance, they saw the soldier from Kadambur approach, horse in tow.
“Will you help me, thambi?” entreated Azhwarkkadiyaan.
“But what can I do? Pazhuvettarayar is among the most powerful men in
the Empire, capable of making anyone dance to his tunes—while I'm just
one man, without any connections. How am I supposed to help?”
Vandhiyathevan's words were cautious. “Nambi,” he began, after a pause.
“Do you really mean to say that you know nothing about royal affairs?
Can't you truly make a guess about who might ascend the throne, if
something should happen to Maharaja Sundara Chozha?”
And he gazed intently at the Vaishnavite, seeking some sort of reaction.
Azhwarkkadiyaan's face, however, remained as placid as ever.
“Again—what do I know of such matters, thambi? Now, if you were to ask
the astrologer of Kudandhai …”
“Ah—and is he truly that skilled?”
“Indeed. He happens to be an expert in not just astrology, but divining your
innermost thoughts. He can even deliver predictions according to the state
of current affairs!”
I certainly must pay this paragon a visit, resolved Vandhiyathevan to
himself.
Humankind has been obsessed, after all, in learning about the future for
millennia. Prince or pauper, intellectual or idiot—no one is exempt from a
deep curiosity in learning about what time holds for them. It's hardly
surprising that our young warrior, entrusted with the weight of royal duty,
and forced to chart a perilous course for himself, should wish to know about
it as well, is it?
Glossary:
Moksham: Salvation
“Approximately 980 years ago…”: This story was written in 1950.

Thiripura Samhaaram: The destruction of the Three Worlds. Like many
Hindu mythological stories, this one too, has its roots in a legend: The
demon Taraka had three demon children Taarakaaksha, Kamalaaksha and
Vidyunmaali, who owned three moving cities or forts and wreaked
destruction, buoyed by their boons from Lord Brahma. Siva Peruman
destroyed them in summary fashion with his destructive powers.
Brindavan-Gopika Women: One of Lord Krishna's favourite pastimes was
to play with the women of the neighbourhood, or even to steal away the
clothes as they bathed. When people wished to deride Lord Vishnu, they
alluded to this often—as only the weak-willed, supposedly, appreciated the
company of women.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 13

The Waxing Moon
Once the princesses had vanished in their chariot, the astrologer escorted
Vandhiyathevan within his home, took his seat, and bade the young man,
who was staring around him with wide-eyed curiosity, take one as well.
Then, the older man subjected him to a keen scrutiny.
“Well, thambi? And who might you be?”
Vandhiyathevan chuckled; the astrologer frowned. “What amuses you?”
“You're supposed to be famed for your skills, aren't you? Why must you ask
me anything, then? Surely you can predict my name and purpose with your
skills in astrology?”
“Ah, it would be no hard task to divine anything about you; such a thing is
well within my means. But if I do everything for myself, what about my
dakshinai, my fee? That is my only concern, you see.”
Vandhiyathevan smiled a little. “Jothidar—who were your visitors?”
“Ah, you ask about the people who just left, do you? The ones who were
here when you came in? The ones who climbed into their chariot and rode
away in a cloud of dust? You are enquiring about them, aren't you?” asked
the astrologer in as roundabout a fashion as he could.
“Yes, they're the ones I'm talking about.”
“Ask away, by all means. You have every right to. And I shall tell you, of
course. The people who just left were two young women.”
“Wonderful. I saw that, myself. I do have eyes after all, and I frequently use
them. I'm capable of distinguishing men from women. I can even tell if a
man is masquerading as a woman.”
“What, then?”

“Women, as in who they are, their designation, their caste, perhaps—”
“Ah, as to that, you do know that women can classified into several types,
don't you? Padmini, Sidhini, Gandharvi and Vidhyaadhari are the four
kinds. You seem to be acquainted with the Samudhrika laws, thambi. Well,
one is a Padmini, while the other is a Gandharvi—”
“Good God!”
“Yes, my man?”
“Why do you answer if I call out to God?”
“And what if I did? You have heard, I hope, that God is omnipresent? You
do not seem to have been fortunate enough to benefit from the knowledge
of your elders. See, my boy—God resides in me, and in you as well. He
dwells even within my young disciple, whom you dragged into my home
—”
“Oh, enough, please—stop.”
“God is the one who has been speaking all this while; God, it is, who
wishes me to stop!”
“Jothidar, all I wanted to know were the names, clan and whereabouts of
the women who just left. Do please stop beating around the bush, and
provide me the details. And if you will—”
“What would you offer me, exactly?”
“Vandhanam; my eternal gratitude, of course.”
“You may keep it. I much prefer pon-dhanam.”
“Fair enough. Would my gold overcome your scruples?”
“That would depend on my discretion. Listen, thambi. An astrologer has
many visitors—and we never divulge information about one to another. I
should never, for instance, reveal anything about the women who just left,
to you. Neither will I betray information about you, to anyone who asks!”
“Ah, Azhwarkkadiyaan Nambi was right about you!”
“And who would that be?”

“Don't you know? He spoke of you as though you were a long-lost friend.
And here, you don't even seem to have heard of him.”
“Perhaps I know the man, but have forgotten his name. Describe him to me,
if you please.”
“Short and squat, with a top knot. He's got quite a paunch, and wears his
veshti tight, around it. He bears the Vaishnavite mark all over his body in
broad stripes, and quarrels with Saivites every chance he gets. As for
Advaitha philosophers, he beats them with his trusty stick. A few moments
ago, you declared that God resided within you and me, didn't you? Well,
had Azhwarkkadiyaan heard it, he'd have yelled: God now attacks God, and
gone at you with a will!”
“Judging by what you have said so far, this would seem to be Thirumalai.”
“Does he have more than one name, then?”
“That staunch Vaishnavite has a name for every town he visits.”
“And a disguise to suit every person too, I suppose?”
“To every situation, as well.”
“And his words are a clever mixture of truth and lies, aren't they?”
“Three fourths, and three-and-a-half veesam might be lies and fantasies, but
the last, tiny half-veesam would be the truth.”
“A thorough rogue, you say?”
“Not at all. He returns kindness with kindness, and villainy in like.”
“But you can't really trust him, can you?”
“That would depend on his speech.”
“He said, for example, that you'd deliver an accurate prediction about my
future.”
“I did mention that there would half a veesam's truth in his words, didn't I?
There you are.”
“In that case, do please predict something. Time's running out, Ayya—I
must leave.”
“Where would you be going to in such a hurry?”

“Couldn't you divine that as well? After all, that was what I wished to ask
you about—my journey, destination and the success of my mission.”
“We need a just a little more information even for such predictions, thambi.
A horoscope, for example; if not, your date of birth and star—or, failing
that, at least your name and hometown.”
“My name is Vandhiyathevan.”
“Ah! A descendent of the Vaanar clan?”
“Yes.”
“You are Vallavarayan Vandhiyathevan?”
“Indeed I am.”
“Excellent! Now, why couldn't you have mentioned this earlier? I may have
to search in my collection—but I believe I actually do have your
horoscope.”
“You do? How come?”
“Astrologers such as myself survive with such stock-in-trade, thambi. We
collect the horoscopes of descendents of great clans and tribes, to study
them—”
“But I'm hardly one, am I?”
“Good god, my man. What is this that you say? Your dynasty is amongst
the greatest that have ruled—why, so many poets have sung the praises of
your ancestors in such glowing terms as to put others to shame! But perhaps
you have not heard any.”
“Why don't you recite one, then?”
The astrologer began at once:
“Vaanan pugazhuraiya
Vaayundo Maagadharkon
Vaanan peyarezhudhaa
Maarbundo vaanan
Kodithaangi nillaatha
Kombundo undo

Adithaangi nillaa
Arasu!”
[“There is none who does not speak of the Vaanar clan's glory; no chest that
does not inscribe their valiant name upon itself; no staff that does not have
the Vaanar flag flying proud; no ruling dynasty that is greater than theirs!”]
Judging by his performance, the astrologer was no singer—but what he
lacked in voice, he more than made up for in spirit, and execution.
“Well?” he asked, when he finished.
“It does sound very well, I admit. But to tell the truth, Ayya, there's no staff
that will carry my ancestor's flag unless I tie it on some plodding cow,
myself. And there's certainly no land, no arasu that bears our rule anymore
—the only rule I can hope for is if I stand on an arasu tree. And even that
might collapse under my weight and fling me to the ground!”
“That might be the case today—but who knows what might happen
tomorrow?”
“Why, I thought you'd know,” put in Vandhiyathevan.
“How could I, thambi? This astrologer is but an ordinary mortal, like
everyone else. Stars and planets chart our lives and futures; all I do is use
my meager knowledge to divine their course, and inform others of it.”
“And what do they say about me?”
“That you grow, with each passing day.”
“Good grief. My height is a hindrance already—I had to duck, just to enter
your home. What am I to do with more? Do let's not be vague, but tell me
something specific, please.”
“Only if your query is precise, as well.”
“Fair enough. Will my mission to Thanjavur succeed?”
“If it is on your account—then yes, for your stars are on the rise, my boy. If
it is on behalf of someone else, though—I shall have to look at their
horoscopes, to determine its future.”
“Good god, Ayya,” Vandhiyathevan shook his head, and touched a finger to
his nose in an expression of surprise. “I have never, in my life, met anyone

quite as clever as you.”
“Flattery will get you nowhere, thambi.”
“Be that as it may—I shall make myself clearer. I wish to seek an audience
with the Emperor, in Thanjavur. Will I?”
“You may have to consult two far greater astrologers, in Thanjavur, to seek
an answer.”
“And who might they be?”
“One is Periya Pazhuvettarayar. The other is Chinna Pazhuvettarayar.”
“I've heard it said that the Emperor's health is rapidly failing. True?”
“Gossip is untrustworthy at the best of times, thambi. Who cares what
anyone says? Do not believe everything you hear. And do not repeat it
either.”
“And what about the succession to the throne? Who do you think will be
the Chakravarthy's heir?”
“Considering it is unlikely to be either you or me—why must we concern
ourselves with such things?”
“Why indeed,” sighed Vandhiyathevan. “We're certainly spared that.”
“True. It is no easy thing to be the heir to an empire, thambi. Far too
dangerous, in fact.”
“Jothidar, you recall that Prince Aditha Karikalar is in Kanchi, at the
moment.”
“I do. You are here on his behalf, aren't you?”
“Finally! You've certainly taken your time, guessing the truth. Now, what
about his future?”
“I am afraid I do not have his horoscope with me. Any prediction I make
can be done only if I have a copy.”
“Well, what about Prince Madhuranthakar's fortunes?”
“A strange horoscope, that one, thambi. Almost feminine, in its qualities.
His is a life that will always be under the influence of others.”

“Isn't that how affairs are, these days? Everyone vows and declares that the
empire is ruled by a woman—that we've knuckled down under a veritable
Alli Rajyam?”
“Do they? Where?”
“North of the Kollidam.”
“Perhaps they speak of the domineering young queen of Periya
Pazhuvettarayar.”
“Not to my knowledge.”
“Oh? Who else, then?”
“Supposedly, it's the Chakravarthy's daughter, Princess Kundhavai, who
rules the land with an iron hand.”
The astrologer subjected Vandhiyathevan to a careful scrutiny: did the
young man know, perhaps, that it was Princess Kundhavai who had just
left? Were all his questions a result of that knowledge, and the desire to dig
deeper?
Vandhiyathevan's face, however, remained guileless.
“That is ridiculous, thambi. The Emperor resides in Thanjai, whereas
Kundhavai Devi has made her home in Pazhaiyarai. Moreover—”
“Well? Moreover … what? What were you about to say?”
“One should look around him well, when speaking of such things in broad
daylight—and never even think to utter them at night. However, you seem
trustworthy enough. These days, the Emperor has no powers, does he?
Aren't the Pazhuvettarayars the ones truly holding the Empire's reins in
their hands?”
And the astrologer stared hard at Vandhiyathevan, again.
“Never fear—I'm not a spy for the Pazhuvettarayars. You needn't entertain
any suspicions on that score. You spoke, a while ago, about the fragility of
kingdoms and dynasties, about how vulnerable they were. You even quoted
the Vaanar dynasty as an example. I request you now—please tell me what
the future truly holds, for the Chozha Empire.”

“Very well. Listen, and I shall tell you this without the slightest shadow of
doubt: By the end of the month of Aani, Kaveri and her sister rivers will
overflow, almost breaking their banks with new floods. People familiar with
Ponni will know that these are new waters, and that they will only increase,
as the days pass by. And that is how it will be, through the months of
Aavani and Purattasi. From Kaarthigai to Margazhi, the floods will begin to
subside—and people will understand then, as well, that such is the way of
nature. That, thambi, is the Chozha Empire, now: it grows and grows, like
the new floods of Ponni and it will continue to expand for the next few
hundred years. At the moment, the Chozha Empire is like that of a waxing
moon. It expands evermore. But there are days, yet, for it to become a
radiant full moon. And so it shall be.”
“Thank you. I'm glad, at any rate, that you've told me this much, in all this
time. Just one thing more: I've longed to go on a sea voyage for a while now
…”
“You will. You possess, you see, the sakadayogam—you are destined to
travel the world as though your feet were on wheels. You will walk, ride
horses; elephants—and even travel aboard a ship. Oh yes, I certainly predict
a sea-voyage, in your future.”
“Ayya, the Senapathi of the Southern Chozha Forces, Prince Arulmozhi
Varmar, who wages war in Eezham at the moment—what can you tell me
about him? How do the stars and planets chart his future?”
“Thambi, you have heard, I suppose, of a tool that sailors use, to tell
direction, mid-sea? It is known as a compass, and even light-houses make
great use of it. But do you know the greatest and most valuable aid to any
sailor, cruising in the choppy waters? It is the pole star, the Dhruva
Natchathiram, that glows in the northern horizon. Other stars and planets
may change position often; even the Seven Sages shift their paths. But the
Dhruva star never moves; it shines steadily, always holding its position.
That, thambi, describes Emperor Sundara Chozha's youngest son, Prince
Arulmozhi Varmar. Nothing can shake his courage and determination; he is
as valiant as he is compassionate, and trustworthy. His knowledge of the
world is as deep and thorough as his education; those who look upon his
innocent, radiant face will feel their sorrows and hardships vanish, and
contentment fill them; he is, in fact, the cherished son of good fortune.

Young men like you, who wish to make something of their lives, would do
well to take him as their idol, just as the sailors guide their ships with the
help of the Dhruva star.”
“Good god—how you do describe Arulmozhi Varmar! As though a young
woman describes her beloved?”
“Anyone who claims the lands of Ponni as his home, thambi, will say the
same.”
“Thank you, Ayya. If ever I have the chance, I shall certainly put your
words to good use.”
“Your stars are on the ascendance as well, thambi—that was why I
predicted what I did.”
“I shall take your leave, then. And with my thanks, I give you what gold I
can afford, as well. Do please, accept it.”
And Vandhiyathevan set down five gold kazhanjus, or coins, as his fee.
“The Vaanar dynasty's claim to philanthropy remains untarnished!” The
astrologer duly accepted them.
Glossary:
Veesam: A measure.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 14

The Crocodile on the Banks
In those days, it was the custom among travellers from Kudandhai to
Thanjavur to journey along the Arisilaaru, or the banks of the River Ponni,
towards Thiruvayaaru, from whence they turned south, towards the capital
city. The reason for their choice was simple: it was on this route that ferries
were plentiful, to cross the rivers that cut across their path: Kudamurutti,
Vettaru, Vennaru and Vadavaaru.
Vandhiyathevan was no different. The first thing he did, when he left
Kudandhai, was to strike out towards the Arisilaaru—and it would be safe
to say that everything he had seen so far, of Chozha Nadu's splendour far
exceeded his expectations. It is quite natural, isn't it, to gasp in amazement
at any vision of beauty, when one first lays eyes on it?
Vandhiyathevan cantered past lush green fields, farms flourishing with the
rich scent of ginger and turmeric; sugarcane and plantain fields, groves of
coconut and areca-nut trees, gentle streams, burbling brooks, placid ponds
and canals that seemed to follow on one another's heels in quick succession.
Hyacinths and lilies grew in profusion in the brooks, while the ponds
practically overflowed with red and white lotuses, and water-lilies, in a riot
of colour and scent. Flocks of storks flew into the sky, large off-white
patches in contrast to the vibrant shades on earth; Naarai birds stood on one
red leg in the waters, lost in meditation. Smaller canals crisscrossing the
fields gushed with water; the fields themselves, enriched as they were
manure, leaves and shoots were a deep, earthy colour, overflowing with
mush. Farmers worked these lands from dawn to dusk, tilling the soil;
women bent towards the earth, engaged in planting, even as they raised
their voice in glorious folk songs.
Lush, fully grown sugarcanes from the previous year were cut in the fields
and transported to mills nearby, where they were promptly pressed for their

sweet juice; jaggery was boiled in their vicinity as well, and the scents
mingled, assaulting the senses in tantalizing fashion.
Tiny, charming huts, some with thatched roofs, others with tiles, peeped out
from the midst of luxurious coconut groves; their entrances, washed and
paved with fresh cow-dung, were in pristine condition, almost gleaming
like mirrors. Some had paddy strewn across their front-doors; roosters often
pecked the grains, crowed a lusty “Kokkorakko!” before prancing away.
Children, supposed to be guarding the grains, barely glanced at them; they
went on playing with shells or the fascinating game of pallanguzhi. Those
roosters can't possibly eat all that much, seemed to be their stance, and the
thieving birds were largely ignored.
Fragrant smoke billowed above the huts; the aroma of steaming rice, frying
grain and roasted meat wafted around them; Vandhiyathevan's mouth fairly
watered. Most warriors of those times were carnivores; the young man was
no different.
Smithies dotted the roadside at regular intervals; glowing coals burnt
fiercely in them. Danaar! Danaar! There—that was the din of iron being
forged. Along with farming implements such as ploughs, spades and
crowbars were littered swords, shields, bows and spears, in large heaps;
farmers and soldiers alike jostled with each other, eager to claim their
implement of choice.
The tiniest of villages boasted of temples that matched their small stature;
they resounded with the auspicious sounds of clanging semakkalams, the
beats of the nagara, sacred chants and sweet Thevaram hymns. Local
deities such as Mariamman were placed on soft cushions and paraded,
while priests danced around in the procession, often carrying colourful
karagams on their heads, or beating tiny percussion instruments known as
udukkai, a sign of their devotion. Some gave liberal offerings of rice, as
well.
Cows ambled through the villages, the bells around their necks tinkling
musically, while boys drove them towards pasture, some even playing
accompaniment on their flutes. Farmers mopped their sweating faces as
they worked, and rested in the cool shade of trees, during intervals. These
were the times they enjoyed ram-fights, setting the horned animals against
each other and egging them on.

Peahens shrieked lustily from their perches, atop huts; peacocks, fascinated
by their calls, dragged their magnificent plumage with difficulty and swung
through the air, settling down among them.
Beautiful doves stalked here and there, twisting their necks to look about
them.
As for the parrots and nightingales, locked away in their cages—ah, those
pitiful creatures sang sorrowful songs, from within their prisons.
Yes, there was plenty to see. Vandhiyathevan drank in the sights, clipclopping slowly on his horse, his mind engaged in capturing and storing
away as much as he could.
But even as he tried to lose himself in the outside world, he was aware,
deep down in his subconscious mind, of a picture—the picture of a
beautiful young woman, shrouded in the mists of his memory.
Ah, why couldn't she have parted her coral lips and addressed a few words
to him? Surely that would have been no loss to her? Who could have she
been? No matter—obviously, she was not very conversant with good
manners. Else, she'd have paid some attention to him, wouldn't she? Was
he, Vandhiyathevan such an insignificant specimen that she must ignore
him so completely? And that wily astrologer hadn't breathed a word about
her identity! Clever, cunning old man, diverting his attention so well, to
other concerns. How perceptive he had been—how vast, his experience of
the world! To tell the truth, he's managed to escape saying anything of
worth—his predictions about royal affairs were vague in the extreme, filled
with caution. The things he did reveal were already public knowledge. Still,
he had mentioned that Vandhiyathevan's stars were on the rise, hadn't he?
For that alone, he deserved some good fortune. Long live the Kudandhai
astrologer!
Vandhiyathevan travelled thus, his mind occupied with everything he had
heard and seen, so far. Sometimes, the outside world caught his attention
and he gave his mind to it as well, in brief intervals. Eventually, he reached
his destination, the Arisilaaru.
In the distance, he heard a few sounds, and stopped.
Feminine laughter—and the tinkling sounds of bangles. Vandhiyathevan
stared at the banks, intrigued, but the dense foliage screened the ladies

effectively. The urge to find them out struck him and he trotted along the
riverside, peering through the trees, trying to find out where they might be.
Abruptly, he heard a scream. “Ayyo! Ayyo! A crocodile—help, please!”
Instantly, Vandhiyathevan spurred his horse towards the frightened voice.
There! He could see a few women through a gap in the trees. Terror painted
their faces vividly—ah, what a surprise! Two of them were the young
women he had seen at the astrologer's home.
It took only a few moments for Vandhiyathevan to take all this in—but this
was not the only thing he saw.
Underneath a large tree, clothed in deep shadows, lay a large crocodile, half
on land and half in water, almost a part of enormous tree's thick roots. Its
mouth gaped wide, teeth jagged and sharp. Vandhiyathevan had seen one
such terrifying reptile himself, in the Kollidam; he had also heard what
frightening predators they were.
This one particularly, brought his worst fears to the surface and set his
nerves jangling with tension. Not only did it seem ready for a human feast,
it was very near the laughing young women as well, mouth open wide as if
to feast upon them. All it had to do was pounce forward—and they would
be torn to pieces! The banks were thick with clusters of trees; there was
really no way for the women to break through them, to escape.
His heart may have been murky with confused feelings, but
Vandhiyathevan's resolve did not falter for an instant. Neither did he spend
time pondering his course of action: he swung up his trusty spear, took aim
and threw it. The weapon cleaved through the air and struck the crocodile,
sure and true, penetrating its thick skin and plunging in, a little. At once,
Vandhiyathevan sprang forward with his sword, fully intending to rip it
apart, once and for all.
But—but why were these women laughing, just like before?
Vandhiyathevan could barely stomach it. Why were they giggling? He
stopped short, suddenly unsure. Not a vestige of fear was on the faces of the
women around him—they looked amused, eyes gleaming with mirth.
Certainly, they did not seem to be the young ladies who had shrieked with
terror just a few moments ago.

One of them—the majestic young woman he had seen at the astrologer's
home—spoke in a melodious voice. “Girls—quiet, all of you! Laughing, at
such a moment —!”
Her stern words echoed vaguely in Vandhiyathevan's ears, as though in a
dream.
Sword still held aloft, he directed his attention to the crocodile. The, he
stared hard at the chuckling women. A suspicion reared up its head—a
suspicion that froze him, mind and body curling in acute embarrassment.
The young woman walked forward again, and stood opposite the crocodile,
as though guarding it. “Many thanks to you, Ayya—but there's no need to
trouble yourself.”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 15

Vanathi's Deceit
Some time ago, we saw Princess Kundhavai and her companion Vanathi,
climb into their chariot and set off for Kudandhai, did we not? It now
behooves us to see what the young women left behind in the boat were up
to, and to listen to their conversation.
“Talk about that Kodumbalur girl's luck!” spoke one. “Tharakai, my girl—
why on earth does our Ilaiya Piratti favour her so much?”
“Favour, my foot. Nothing of the sort, Varini. That little idiot has been
wandering about like a lunatic for the last four months, fainting all over the
place. She has no parents—of course you'd expect Kundhavai Devi to be
worried about someone who has been completely entrusted to her care.
That, I suspect, is the only reason for her concern, and she's taken the girl to
the astrologer to—to instate enquiries, as they say,” said Tharakai,
decidedly. “Perhaps she's afflicted by ghosts or spirits? They'd have to use a
good many chants and rituals to drive them out of her, wouldn't they?”
“Ghosts and spirits!” spat Varini, with terrible scorn. “Which of those
pathetic things would get hold of her? That one is capable of banishing a
hundred ghosts all on her own!”
“Vanathi's fainting fits? All an act,” supplied another. “It's her plan to cast a
net and slowly, reel our Prince into her scheming, greedy clutches.”
“Niravathi is right,” concurred Varini. “Remember that day, when she
actually dropped her sacred aarathi plate, with its flame glowing bright?
I'm quite sure that was just a ploy, to get his attention. How do you think a
sturdy plate, held with both hands could possibly slip and fall? Shaking and
shivering at the sight of our Prince too—as though he were some sort of
wild animal, a tiger or bear. Really?”

“And to actually faint away gracefully, once she did let the plate fall—
imagine the cunning of that woman! She pulled that off quite neatly, I must
admit.”
“What angers me is not even her sly act—but that Kundhavai Devi and our
Prince were taken in so completely,” exclaimed one, called Senthiru. “How
could they?”
“Truly, these are the times of liars, cheats and those who employ cunning
and wiles without a speck of remorse,” mourned a young lady named
Mandhakini.
“But it worked, didn't it?” queried Varini. “The Prince, who'd almost started
for battle, returned and made enquiries about Vanathi, didn't he? Her deceit
actually served its purpose.”
“Not at all. The fact that he asked after her only shows how solicitous he is.
Did you really expect him to just walk away without a backward glance,
once he'd seen a girl faint right in front of him?” countered Tharakai. “You
needn't make it out to be something it isn't.”
“I'm not. But you're right about the Prince—he's quite the most
compassionate person in all the fourteen worlds. There's no one to equal
him, not even in our epics and tales!” enthused Varini. “But that's not what
I'm talking about. This one—Vanathi—do you know why she faints so
much? There's no need to tramp all the way to an astrologer about it. I could
have told Kundhavai Devi, myself!”
“Do you know what ails her, then?” questioned Senthiru. “Well, what is it?”
Varini leaned forward and murmured something into her friend's ears.
“What are you whispering about?” asked Niravathi. “Why couldn't you tell
us all, too?”
“Vanathi's illness isn't an ordinary one, it seems,” revealed Senthiru,
mischief gleaming in her eyes. “She faints of desire!”
The boat rang with peals of merry laughter; birds, roosting contentedly in
the trees around, flapped away at the sudden sound.
“This wily one might try some of her sorcery on the Prince again; sprinkle
him with magic dust, maybe, when he returns from battle in Ilankai,” said

Niravathi. “We're not going to let her get away with it, are we?”
“I can tell you this: by the time he does return to Chozha Nadu, Vanathi is
likely to tear all her hair out and run completely insane,” predicted
Tharakai. “Or I shall change my name to the demon Thadagai!”
“Forget her for the moment, and bend your mind, if you please, to the task
Ilaiya Piratti set us, before she left. Oughtn't we to complete it before she
returns?” Mandhakini cut in. “Quickly!”
Two of the young women bent and pulled up a plank at the bottom of the
boat, which was a little askew. Underneath was a space the dimensions of a
long box, and in it lay a crocodile! One long dead and gone, which had been
preserved, stuffed with cotton and fibre, and now looked as real as a live
one. They placed it above board carefully, released the boat from its
docking-place, and rowed along slowly, until they came to a huge tree on
the banks, its thick roots crisscrossing heavily over each other. They threw
the crocodile out, placing it strategically half in and half out of the water.
Lying motionless on the roots, the crocodile looked every bit as menacing
as a real one, mouth open wide. One of its legs was tied to a root with a
small piece of rope, to keep it from getting washed away. The young
women made sure the rope lay submerged, under the water.
“Mandhakini, my girl,” began Tharakai. “Why do you think Ilaiya Piratti
asked us to set up this elaborate charade, with a fake crocodile?”
“Didn't you know? It's to stop Vanathi from being such a terrible coward.
Kundhavai Devi wishes Vanathi to screw up some courage, I gather.”
“Why—it almost looks like …” Niravathi paused, and pondered. “Has she
decided, after all, that Vanathi will make our Prince the perfect wife?”
“If there's any such scheme in the offing, I shall poison that sly wretch with
my own hands, see if I don't!” swore Varini, who was inclined to harbour a
jealous nature.
“Don't let such thoughts upset you, my dear. I've heard that everyone, from
the Rettai Mandala Chakravarthy in Maniya Kedam, the King of Vengi, the
Emperor of Kalinga, to the rulers of Empires as far away as Kanauj, are
fighting over themselves to get their daughters married to our Prince. Why
would anyone waste time upon an insignificant Kodumbalur girl, when so

many other such favourable alliances glimmer upon the horizon?” spoke
Mandhakini, reassuringly.
“Every Emperor in the world might await the Chozha dynasty's pleasure—
but surely our Prince's opinion is the only one that matters the most? I've
heard it said that he has very definite ideas, about wedlock. If I ever enter
upon marriage, it will only be with a girl from Thamizhagam, he seems to
have said,” informed Senthiru. “Surely you all know this?”
“Excellent, then. We'll all work some sorcery on our own, and show
everyone what we're capable of, one by one. If that little witch Vanathi can
play up to the Prince so much, surely we can, too?” announced Tharakai.
“Even better, perhaps. We've all got our share of magic dust, haven't we?”
There was reason enough for such vitriolic speech from every young lady
on the boat—a particular incident that had roused the worst in them. An
event that we shall now explore.
Glossary:
Aarathi: A sacred ritual usually performed by the women of any household
to drive away evil spirits, before embarking upon any important event.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 16

Arulmozhi Varmar
Around 982 years before, the southern lands flourished under the inimitable
rule of Emperor Rajakesari Varmar, Sundara Chozhar, who had ascended
the throne approximately twelve years before this story opens. In the last
hundred years, the Chozha Empire had grown by leaps and bunds; its
dominions expanding with every generation—and yet, affairs were in a
tumultuous state when Sundara Chozha came to power; foes were gaining
in strength to the south and north of the Empire. Sundara's predecessor,
Kandaradithya, had pledged himself to Siva Peruman, and lost himself in
worship; such was his piety that he had even earned the respectful title: Siva
Gnana Kandaradithyar. Deep devotion aside, this meant that the Empire's
administration suffered, as he had little time to spare for affairs of state; nor
did he bend his mind or energy towards expanding existing dominions.
Arinjayar, who succeeded his brother to the throne, stayed on it for merely a
year, before breathing his last in Atrur in Thondai Mandalam, thus earning a
unique sobriquet himself, which meant that his son, Paranthaka Sundara
Chozha was his heir and successor.
The young ruler seemed to posses every characteristic that defined an
Emperor, destined to raise his people and lands to great heights. Naturally
inclined towards battle, and proficient in war tactics, one of the first things
he did, upon ascending the throne, was to go to war, in the south. The
Chozha and Pandiya armies clashed in a terrible battle in Sevur. Despite the
assistance of Ilankai King Mahindan's army, which had journeyed all the
way from Ilankai, Veera Pandiyan's army suffered a crushing defeat at the
hands of the far greater Chozha forces. Lost, without his crown, kingdom
and cohorts, Veera Pandiyan managed to escape with just his life, and hid
himself away in a mountainous cave in arid lands, nursing his wounds in
humiliation.

The Eezham forces suffered heavy casualties as well; those few who
managed to survive, decided that glory and valour were much too large a
price to pay and took to their heels, back to Ilankai.
Such was the situation, for at least a while now: it had become almost an
acknowledged practice of sorts for Ilankai kings to send their forces to aid
the Pandiyas, whenever the latter tussled with Chozha forces. Sundara, not
unnaturally, wanted to put a stop to such a practice: he decided that the
Sinhala kings needed to be taught a lesson, and sent a large force under the
command of Commander Paranthaka Velan the Younger, of the
Kodumbalur dynasty, to teach it.
Their intentions may have been exceptional, but the army failed, when it
came to strategy and execution. Despite their huge numbers, the Chozha
forces did not reach Ilankai at the same time; a lack of ships forced them to
stagger their approach. The first lot, instead of waiting for the rest to arrive
and regroup, took a decision to advance on its own. They paid for their lack
of forethought dearly: Sinhala forces, led by Mahindan's trusted
Commander Sena, surrounded them. Bloody battle broke out and went on
furiously—and it was here that Paranthaka Velan the Younger lost his life,
carving a name for himself in the history and stone inscriptions of
Thamizhagam forevermore, with this valiant title: Eezhathu Patta
Paranthakan Siriya Velan, or Paranthaka Velan the Younger, Who
Embraced Death at Eezham.
No sooner than Veera Pandiyan, hiding out in his cave, heard this news,
than he was renewed with a fresh burst of courage and hope; he gathered
his forces again, and went into battle with the Chozhas. He was destined to
taste a defeat far worse than the previous time: not only was his army
routed out; he himself lost his life. This was the battle that saw the
emergence of Sundara Chozha's son Aditha Karikalar as a decisive warrior:
he took charge, decimated the enemy and performed a great many valiant
deeds which earned him the prestigious title of the Kopparakesari Who
Beheaded Veera Pandiyan.
They might have proven their point with the Pandiya forces—but the urge
to teach Sinhala king Mahindan a lesson still burned fiercely, not just in
Sundara Chozha's heart, but also his commanders, aides, right down to the

last, raw soldier. Accordingly, a huge army was assembled once again—but
this time, an important question cropped up: who would lead them?
Sundara Chozha's firstborn, Crown Prince Aditha Karikalar was stationed
with his forces at the northern frontiers, at this time. Lately, the Rashtrakuda
forces had been usurping power in Thirumunaippaadi and Thondai
Mandalam; the Prince had taken them to task severely, and driven them out.
His mission complete, he had made Kanchi his headquarters and was
immersed in preparations for further war, in the north.
This being the case, it was obvious that there was now a chance for others
to prove themselves. The commanders of the Chozha forces now began to
compete among themselves in earnest, for the honour of leading their army
to Eezham. Much jealousy was roused; many were the incidents of backstabbing and resentment among them. In those hoary days, it was more the
norm to fight for the honour of leaving for the battlefield, among warriors,
than staying behind. Many were the quarrels and disputes that often rose
among them, when it came to expressing valour in war.
One man, however, came forward to hush them, and avoid further
altercations: Sundara Chozha's younger son, Prince Arulmozhi Varmar.
“Appa,” he addressed his father. “I've spent enough time being coddled by
my aunts and grandmothers at Pazhaiyarai. Kindly appoint me the
Commander of the Southern Chozha Forces. Allow me to leave for Ilankai
—and I shall lead our men to victory!”
Barely nineteen years old at that time, he was the cherished youngest child
of the Emperor; adored by the many queen and royal ladies at Pazhaiyarai
—and indeed, the much beloved son of Chozha Nadu itself.
Emperor Sundara Chozha was a handsome man. His father Arinjayar,
infatuated with the luminous beauty of Kalyani, a princess of the
Vaithumbarayar clan, legendary foes of the Chozha dynasty, had married
her forthwith; their first son had been named Paranthaka. Chozha subjects,
however, who were dazzled by his chiseled features and good looks,
promptly renamed him Sundara—The Beauteous One. The name found
favour and was adopted, henceforth.
It was only natural that all their offspring be famed for their looks—but
their last, Arulmozhi Varmar outshone them all. His features possessed a

beauty that seemed not merely human, but almost divine, in their
perfection. As an infant, he was coddled and petted endlessly by the royal
women; so many were the kisses showered on his chubby cheeks that they
were almost blistered red. But the one who cherished him the most,
perhaps, was his elder sister, Kundhavai.
She may have only been a couple of years older than him, but somehow, the
idea that she was responsible for her young brother's wellbeing had lodged
itself firmly in young Kundhavai's consciousness. Even more astonishing—
Arulmozhi Varmar cherished an equal, if not greater regard and affection,
for his sister. Not a thought or word would he entertain, that might displease
her. Kundhavai's slightest wish was his command; her every word carried
almost divine authority. Not even the combined forces of the holy trinity,
Brahma, Vishnu and Siva could serve to turn him against her, or ignore her
instructions. The very thought was repugnant to him.
She, for her part, spent many naazhigais watching him keenly—not just
when he was awake, but asleep as well. He possesses divine gifts, this boy—
a strange power; a magnetism, she would muse often, as her eyes
scrutinized his chiseled features. It is my duty to ensure that his potential is
nurtured to fruition!
She turned his palms upwards often, as he slept, and gazed keenly at the
lines that crisscrossed them. In her imagination, they resembled the divine
conch and discus, symbols of the supreme Lord Vishnu himself. Ah, this
young man was obviously meant to bring the whole wide world under his
benign rule! But then—there seemed to be no indication whatsoever, that he
would ever ascend the Chozha throne. There were two contenders to the
Empire, senior to him—where was the question of him ever becoming a
ruler? Which throne would he ever grace? On the other hand, humans were
incapable of understanding God's will, or His divine plans. The world was
huge; thousands of kingdoms and empires dotted its surface. There were
wondrous tales of heroes travelling from one kingdom to another, winning
it over with their incredible courage and establishing themselves as rulers,
weren't there? Hadn't a young prince from the country of Vanga, practically
thrown out from his own fertile, Ganga-enriched plains, made his escape on
boat, reached Ilankai, and managed to rule that island-country wisely and
well? Hadn't his descendents, the proud, Sinhala royal family, carried his
name for a thousand years?

Thus, Kundhavai Piratti spent her days, foreseeing and planning endlessly,
her young sibling's future. Eventually, when discussion about commanding
the forces to Eezham came up, she decided that Arulmozhi was the best
contender for the position.
“Thambi, it hurts me greatly to be parted from you, but I'm afraid I must be
the one to send you away, myself,” she said. “You must go to Ilankai—you
will be the Commander of the Southern Chozha forces!”
The Prince submitted to this dictum with great enthusiasm. Hitherto, he had
been stifled among the overpowering affection of the royal mothers; when,
oh when would he ever be rid of their ties to him? And now, his very sister
had given him permission to leave—what more did he need?
There would be no obstacles to his going either; was there a soul in the
Chozha Empire who could gainsay her? Did she not reign supreme in
Emperor Sundara Chozha's heart? And did he not he think the world of his
daughter's good sense?
In due course, Prince Arulmozhi Varmar was appointed the Thenthisai
Maathanda Nayakar, the Commander of the Southern Chozha forces; he
left for Ilankai, and did head the armed forces for an appreciable time. War,
however, was not finished with him; there seemed to be a great deal of
difference between his, and others' approach to it. There were a good many
equipments and implements that he had great difficulty in procuring, in this
war-torn land; he needed these from his home-country and duly made a
visit, where he petitioned his father the Emperor, about them. Having made
arrangements to suit his purpose, he soon prepared to set off for Ilankai
again.
Princess Kundhavai made sure that her brother departed Pazhaiyarai in
pomp and splendour: she had organized quite a few events in the principal
palace, for his edification. When Arulmozhi stepped out of the palace
confines, conches blew deafeningly, drums thundered victoriously,
accompanied by the smaller siru parai beats, in the courtyard; while chants
of triumph cleaved the very skies.
Every one of the royal mothers blessed their favourite son, applied sacred
ash on his forehead, uttered many blessings to ward off evil spirits and gave
him leave to return to battle.

At the palace's main entrance, as Prince Arulmozhi Varmar prepared to step
from within the complex towards the street, stood Kundhavai Devi's
handmaidens, each with a golden plate in her hand, and a lamp burning
bright, on it. No ordinary young women either, these; each was a member of
one of the land's most prominent royal families; each considered it the
epitome of good fortune to serve at the feet of Periya Piratti Sembian
Mahadevi, and be the friend and confidante of Kundhavai Piratti. One
among them was the Kodumbalur princess, Vanathi, daughter of Paranthaka
Velan the Younger.
The prince neared them; the young ladies felt their hearts flutter in
excitement and delight. They raised their golden plates and began to
perform an aarathi.
Abruptly, for some reason, Vanathi's slender frame shook and shivered.
Clang! The plate slipped from her nerveless hands and fell to the ground in
an explosion of sound.
Ah, how inauspicious!—was the thought that flitted through the minds of
everyone present. And yet—despite the plate having crashed down in such
a terrible fashion—the wick continued to burn steadily. An almost audible
sigh of relief swept in a gust through the gathering. This, pronounced many
elders, was an excellent omen indeed.
A smile blossomed on the face of Prince Arulmozhi Varmar, at the terrified
young woman who had let slip her plate in such inexplicable fashion. He
moved beyond her—and the next instant, Vanathi, who was obviously
overwhelmed with embarrassment at her clumsiness, crumpled to the
ground, unconscious.
The rest of the women, following Kundhavai's command, swiftly carried
her into a room, and laid her on a platform. Ilaiya Piratti herself stayed with
Vanathi, trying to bring her around in vain; so absorbed was she in this task
that she did not even watch her brother take his leave. Arulmozhi Varmar,
who had caught sight of Vanathi fainting at the doorstep, paused before
climbing onto his horse and sent a messenger to his sister: “What ails the
young woman who fainted just now? Is she better?”
“Ask the Prince to step in here for a moment,” was Princess Kundhavai's
terse reply. Accustomed to obeying her every command, Arulmozhi Varmar

returned to the palace at once. He walked into the room Vanathi had been
laid in, and saw his sister trying desperately to bring that young woman
around, as she lay against her shoulder. The sight was enough to melt his
heart.
“Who is this young woman, Akka?” asked the Prince. “What's her name?”
“Vanathi—she's the daughter of Kodumbalur Paranthaka Velan the
Younger,” answered Kundhavai, almost abstracted. “She's frightened
easily.”
“Ah—now I understand the reason for her weakness. Wasn't her father the
warrior who led Chozha forces to Ilankai and embraced death, in battle?
Perhaps those memories were too much for her.”
“Perhaps—but I shall take care of her, never fear. May you be victorious in
war, thambi! Return to us safely, and keep me apprised of everything
through messages,” advised Kundhavai.
“As you wish,” acknowledged the Prince. “Please do the same for me as
well.”
Perhaps it was the effect of his melodious voice—but Vanathi began to
regain consciousness by degrees. Her eye-lids fluttered, and opened a
crease; the sight of the Prince in front of her made them open very wide.
Her face bloomed with unexpected delight. Lips as red as coral parted a
little, and a shy smile appeared on her face, dimpling her cheeks.
With consciousness returned awareness; she rose, suddenly bashful, and
realized that she had been lying against Princess Kundhavai all this while.
Embarrassment overwhelmed her as she remembered all that had happened,
in an instant. “Akka, what have I done?” she whispered, eyes brimming
with tears.
The Prince cut in, before Kundhavai could. “There's no need to fret, Vanathi
—these things happen to the best of us. And you, in particular, have more
reason than any to be overwhelmed. In fact, I was saying as much, to Ilaiya
Piratti.”
Vanathi could barely believe her ears. Was it really the Prince, widely
reputed to have never even glanced at any woman in the face, consoling her
thus? Was it really he who was soothing her with sweet words? Ah, how

she could bear such good fortune? What had she done to deserve this? Why,
her skin was breaking out in goose-bumps. Her head spun—she was about
to faint again …
“Akka, my men await me,” the Prince spoke once more. “When next you
send a missive, kindly inform me about this young woman's health as well.
Do take care of her—she has no one else, you see.” He was gone on the
words.
The rest of Princess Kundhavai's handmaidens observed this exchange with
keen interest, watching from various balconies, and through windows that
liberally dotted the palace. A spark of jealousy was kindled in their hearts—
which swiftly grew into a roaring flame.
For, ever since then, Kundhavai made Vanathi her especial friend, and
began to take a keen interest in that young lady. The two were inseparable;
Kundhavai showered Vanathi with affection. Fine arts, music or skills—she
taught her everything she knew, and the two were rarely apart. Kundhavai
often took her young friend to the royal gardens, where she spoke at length
about her brother's fortunes, her own dreams, and the grand future she had
imagined for him. To all this, Vanathi listened with rapt and gratifying
attention.
Vanathi fainted four of five times more, after this incident; Kundhavai
attended to her always, and brought her back to consciousness.
The younger girl would come to, sobbing as if her heart would break, each
time. “Silly girl!” Kundhavai would remonstrate, and console her as best as
she could. “Come, now—dry your tears, do. Why do you weep this way?”
“I—I don't know, Akka,” Vanathi would sob more. “Forgive me, please!”
And Kundhavai would embrace her, soothing her with soft words of
reassurance and comfort.
All this, of course, only served to fan the flames of jealousy even more, in
the hearts of the other handmaidens. Considering everything that had
occurred so far—wasn't it only natural that they behave the way they did,
once Kundhavai and Vanathi had set out for Kudandhai?
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 17

Of Galloping Horses
Quite simply, matters stood thus: only the best of women could make an
excellent bride for her brother, who was destined to achieve greatness; who
had no equal among men. This, Kundhavai had decided, was none other
than Vanathi.
There was only obstacle to her ambition: the one fault, in the Kodumbalur
princess's disposition—Vanathi was much too much a coward for
Kundhavai's taste. Surely a young woman, about to wed a warrior among
warriors; a princess destined to give birth to the emperor of emperors, could
not afford to quake in fear at the slightest pretext?
Plainly, there was only one thing to do: Vanathi must be transformed into a
fearless maiden at all costs. It was with this praiseworthy intention that she
had arranged for the charade with a fake crocodile—but the Kodumbalur
princess managed to exceed all her expectations and emerge victorious in
her trial.
Once the princesses had returned from Kudandhai, they climbed into the
boat, which cruised along the little river for a while. It was their custom to
halt along the banks where trees grew in profusion; the young women
would then play about in the water to their heart's content. They did the
same today as well, and each descended from the boat into the river.
Abruptly, one of them set up a yell. “Ayyo, a crocodile!” She pointed at the
opposite side of the tree they stood beside. “A crocodile! Ayyo!” she
screamed again. The rest promptly took up the refrain, shrieking in terror,
and began to scuttle in every direction.
The only exception was Vanathi, who did not seem fazed in the least at the
commotion. The sight of the crocodile a few bare feet from her, straddling
the tree roots and gaping it jaws wide, seemed to hold no fear for her.

Neither did her obviously petrified friends, acting, as per their ‘chief’s
instructions, inspire any fear in her. “Akka, a crocodile is fearsome only
when it's in the water,” she explained to Kundhavai Devi. “This one's only
on land. Do tell the others not to be scared, do!”
“Why, you little devil! You knew that crocodile wasn't real, didn't you?'
accused one of the girls. “Someone must have told you the truth!”
“I wouldn't have been afraid even if it had been a real one,” confessed
Vanathi. “You see—I'm terrified only of lizards and cockroaches.”
It was at this moment that our hero Vandhiyathevan crashed through the
trees and reached the river, eager to perform a daring rescue. He took a look
at the fearsome crocodile, and threw his spear at it.
And then, that majestic young woman who had captured his fancy so much
came forward, shielding the crocodile, and said something in a rich,
melodious voice. Ah—one, at least of Vandhiyathevan's desires ever since
he had seen her at the astrologer's home, was now fulfilled: she had parted
her coral lips and spoken to him!
And yet—that crocodile bothered him considerably. Why was standing in
front of it, as though guarding the reptile? Why was she beseeching him
“not to trouble himself” about it? And why, oh, why hadn't the ferocious
predator in question not moved an inch? Why did it lie so still?
Meanwhile, that young lady continued to speak. “Ayya, you apologized
about barging into the astrologer's home in Kudandhai without so much as a
by-your-leave—and I'm afraid we walked away without a word. Perhaps
you think Chozha women are bad-mannered to treat you so, but nothing
could be further from the truth. My friend was feeling faint—and I was
intent on caring for her. That, I assure you, was the only reason for my
behaviour—”
Ah, what a musical voice! Why does my heart flutter and melt as she speaks
to me? Why does a lump lodge itself into my throat? Neither flute nor
veena has ever fascinated me thus, with its music; the drums of war have
never roused me to such intense emotion—not shaken me so! Why can't I
interrupt her? No words rise to my memory—my tongue cleaves to my
mouth—why? Why doesn't the wind rustle through the trees? And that
crocodile—why is it so still?

Even as his heart rose and fell with the tumult of his emotions, the young
woman who had mesmerized him continued to speak. There was a dreamlike quality to the scene; her voice reached him as if through a mist: “Ayya,
your intentions were most honourable—you threw your spear at the
crocodile to save us helpless females from its terrible clutches. And I assure
you, your valour is undisputed; such unerring accuracy is a very rare feat
indeed —!”
The rest of the handmaidens, who had gathered under a tree, observing
them, broke into a peal of merry laughter.
And Vandhiyathevan's beautiful dream came to an abrupt halt. The strands
of the magical web her melodious words had woven around him broke with
a snap.
He stared hard at the crocodile. Then, he stalked past the giggling maidens
by the tree, and approached it. He placed a hand on his trusty spear,
embedded in the reptile's body, and pulled it hard. The spear, yielding to
such robust treatment, came away—but what was this that spurted out of
the gaping hole left behind? Blood and gore? Indeed, no—just lumps of
cotton and plantain fibre!
Those girls—wretched, unfeeling girls—laughed again. And this time, they
clapped and almost danced with unholy glee.
Vandhiyathevan wished the ground would simply open and swallow him
up. Never, in all his years, had he ever suffered such crushing
embarrassment. Why, why must he be subject to this dishonour in front of
these laughing girls? If they were, indeed, girls—no, they were little
demons! He wouldn't spend a moment more, in their company. Ah, my
trusted spear—to suffer such an ignominy! How am I ever going to cleanse
this blemish, and avenge you?
All of these thoughts flitted through his mind in a matter of moments. Had
those who dared to mock him been men—ah, things would have been
mightily different, then. These banks would have seen a ferocious battle;
none would have been alive to laugh at him! This pretty little Arisilaaru
would have carried their blood to the seas, instead of red, rich water! But
these were women. What could he do, but give them a wide berth and walk
away?

Vandhiyathevan stepped away from them—ignored even the majestic
young woman who had captured his attention—and sprang towards the
banks, almost leaping towards his horse. That noble animal neighed when it
saw its master; to Vandhiyathevan's furious ears, it sounded as though even
his faithful steed was laughing at him. He treated it the way he could not
treat the women: leaping onto its back, he delivered two stinging slaps with
his reins. The horse, roused to fury, practically galloped along the road,
edging the banks.
Kundhavai stood staring for a while, as horse and rider set off at a furious
speed from the river. She continued to watch as they disappeared in the
distance, until the dust settled.
Then, she turned to her handmaidens. “Really, girls—you need a lesson on
manners, all of you. You have every right to act any way you wish when
we're alone—but kindly do, do strive for some decorum, in front of others.
And you shouldn't have laughed at him. Why you couldn't have kept your
silence in the presence of a young man, I shall never know. What do you
suppose his opinion will be, about the morals and manners of us Chozha
women?”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 18

Idumbankaari
We shall now return to Azhwarkkadiyaan, also known more respectfully as
Thirumalaiyappar, whom we left destitute on the banks of the Kollidam—
and learn his fate.
He stared after Vandhiyathevan, as that young man leapt on his horse and
galloped towards Kudandhai. The lad's a wily one, he murmured to himself.
No matter how I try and trick him, he manages to evade my questions like a
slippery eel. And after all that—I couldn't find out a thing about his master,
or mission. And what was his part in the midnight conference at
Kadambur? Was he even there? I don't know anything about that, either.
Ah, well, at least I've bundled him off to Kudandhai—perhaps the
astrologer can accomplish what I couldn't.
A voice right by his ear made him jump. “Are you speaking to the arasu
tree, Swami? Or to yourself?”
Thirumalaiyappar turned to see the Kadambur soldier, who had brought
Vandhiyathevan a horse, standing by him.
“You, my man? I hate to disappoint you, but I wasn't talking to either—just
a ghost that resides in this tree,” was Azhwarkkadiyaan's repartee. “We
happen to be old friends, you see.”
“Ah—and would your ghost be Saivite, or Vaishnavite?”
“That was my question too—but the dratted thing vanished before I could
wring an answer. Never mind; what are you called?”
“Why do you wish to know, Swami?”
“You saved our boat from capsizing in the middle of the Kollidam, didn't
you? Don't I have a sacred duty to remember you and yours?”

“My … my name is—is Idumbankaari, Swami,” stammered the other.
“Why—it seems familiar to me, somehow …”
Idumbankaari did something strange, at that moment: he splayed out his
fingers, turned palms towards the earth, placed one top of another, and
waved his thumbs on either side. All the while, he stared hard at Nambi.
“I'm afraid I don't understand—what sort of a sign is this, my man?”
queried Thirumalaiyappar.
Idumbankaari's pinched face darkened further; his brows drew in a frown.
“I? But I did nothing.”
“Oh yes, you did. You placed your palms and brought them together in a
gesture that Bharathanatyam dancers use, to depict Thirumaal's' first
incarnation, didn't you?”
“Thirumaal's incarnation? I really don't understand, Swami.”
“No? But how surprising! It's the Machavatharam.”
“Macham—do you mean a fish, perhaps?”
“Indeed, I do.”
“Good heavens; such a peculiar sight as you have! You see ghosts on empty
trees—and fishes on my bare hands! Perhaps you're a little over-fond of sea
food, eh, Swami?”
“Chee! Pray do not talk this way, my man. Be that as it may—remember
that staunch Saivite who travelled with us? Do you know which way he
went?”
“Don't I, now? He joined me on my journey to get a horse—and called you
every name he could think of, all the way, not to mention heaping abuse—”
“If you'd be kind enough to be specific—”
“That if he ever saw you again, he would shave your top knot off; make
sure you were bald—”
“Ah, so he's trained in that sort of work too, is he?”
“–and he would rub off every vestige of Thirumaal's sign, the naamam on
your body, and smother you in Siva Peruman's sacred ash, as well!”

“Ha—in that case, I really must meet him. Where does he hail from, do you
know?”
“He mentioned that he was from Pullirukkum Velur, himself.”
“A reunion with this old and valued friend is certainly in order. And where
would you be off to, my man? Perhaps your way lies in the same
direction?”
“Oh no, Swami. Why should it? I'm off to Kadambur again, once I cross the
Kollidam. Else the master would gouge my eyes out.”
“In that case, time you left. Look, the boatman is about to set off.”
Idumbankaari turned, and saw that Azhwarkkadiyaan was right. “Very well,
Swami, I shall take your leave, then.” And he began to make his way
towards the ferry. Halfway there, he looked back once again.
But Azhwarkkadiyaan had done something peculiar in his turn: he had
clambered swiftly up the arasu tree, and secreted himself amongst its
thickest, leafiest branches. Idumbankaari, thus, saw nothing of the
Vaishnavite.
One of the boatmen called out to Idumbankaari. “Are you travelling to the
opposite shore?”
“Perhaps in the next boat,” answered the menial. “You may leave.”
“Well! What with you scampering to the boat, I really thought for a moment
that you were in a hurry to cross,” grumbled the boatman. “And I actually
waited to take you on board!” He began to paddle across the river, shaking
his head.
So I was right, after all, mused Thirumalai, who sat well concealed in the
arasu tree's thick foliage. He isn't returning to Kadambur, after all—he has
a few tricks up his sleeve, this one. And I shall watch to see which way he
goes. After all, didn't I see him make the sign of the fish with my own eyes?
What would that mean? A fish—what does a fish represent, now—ah, could
it possibly—surely not? But what else could it be? A fish is the muchvaunted symbol of the Pandiya flag—why not, then? Ah, it certainly could
be! In which case, I must be just a little more patient. After all, patience
rules the earth; while impatience begets a forest—but then, these days, it's
far better to rule over trees and animals than a country. Still, I may as well

wait and watch. Thus Thirumalai, mumbling his thoughts to the invisible
ghost in the tree.
His patience paid off; soon enough, Idumbankaari, he was gratified to see,
did not get into the boat, but walked back, staring hard at the arasu tree all
the while. Then he looked in all four directions keenly, as though to
ascertain himself that Azhwarkkadiyaan truly had left—and arrived at the
bottom of the tree himself. He glanced around him once again, and then
made himself comfortable underneath it. Judging by the number of glances
he cast around him, he seemed to expect someone, or something—but the
one place he never did check was above him. It was doubtful if he would
have seen anything, even if he had—Thirumalai had concealed himself so
perfectly that neither hair nor hide could be glimpsed.
Approximately a naazhigai passed, thus; Thirumalai's legs had gone to
sleep. He was not sure how long he could stay this way, lodged within the
cramped confines of a tree—but Idumbankaari seemed to have no intention
of leaving. Thirumalai considered his options: there was no way to leave
without rousing his attention; no matter how stealthily he clambered down
the other side, some little noise was sure to be heard. Idumbankaari had the
ears of a lynx cat—and a sharp little knife, to boot. What was the guarantee
that he would not hesitate to plunge it in Thirumalai's chest?
Well, what else was he supposed to do, then? Could he, perhaps, jump
down on Idumbankaari himself, screaming like the ghost that was
supposedly possessing this tree? The man might be fooled—even faint from
the horror of it. Or Thirumalai might just make a run for it.
At this moment, his penance seemed to come to an end.
A man approached the tree from the southwest—that is, from the road that
led to Kudandhai. Some instinct warned Thirumalai that this was whom
Idumbankaari had been awaiting, all this while. He was right. The latter
stood up, as the man neared.
The new arrival mimicked the hand gesture Idumbankaari had made some
time ago, palms on top of each other, thumbs moving—depicting a fish.
Idumbankaari did the same.
“Your name?” asked the man.
“Idumbankaari. And yours?”

“Soman Saambavan.”
“I've been expecting you.
“So have I. In fact, I came here to meet you.”
“Which path do we take?”
“The one to the west, of course.”
“Where to?”
“The foe's pallipadai.”
“You mean the old monument near Thiruppurambiyam—”
“Quiet! What if someone's eavesdropping?” And Soman Saambavan stared
hard around him.
“Not at all—I checked quite carefully.”
“No possibility of anyone hiding around hereabouts, is there?”
“Absolutely not.”
“Time to start, then. I'm not very familiar with the paths, so you'll have to
lead the way. Go on, first—I'll be right behind you. Just … wait every few
paces and see if I'm following.”
“It isn't a very good path—it cuts through the jungle, and is littered with
sharp stones and thorns. You'll have to be careful.”
“Never mind; get going. And remember—it might be a forest path, but you
must conceal yourself the instant you see someone. D'you understand?”
“Yes, yes, I do!”
Idumbankaari went west, skirting the banks of the Kollidam; Soman
Saambavan followed him after a while.
Azhwarkkadiyaan stayed on the tree all this while, listening and watching
with keen interest. Ah, these truly were terrible times, he reflected. God has
given me an unimaginable opportunity to learn something incredibly
significant! Now, it is up to me to use it wisely, and find out exactly what
these men might be up to. Kadambur proved something of a disappointment
—I couldn't find out much. This time—ah, this time, I will make sure I
divine everything I can. They are going to the pallipadai at

Thiruppurambiyam—certainly it can be nothing but the Ganga king
Prithvipathi's monument. Ah well, it was built a hundred years ago; no
wonder it lies in ruins, now. It's situated in the middle of a deep forest too;
the village is some distance away. But why are these men journeying all the
way into dense jungle, to converse within the ruins of a monument erected
for the dead? Surely anything they wish to discuss can be done right here.
Perhaps there are others joining them? Why, though? And didn't one of
them mention something about “the foe's pallipadai?” Who had
Prithvipathi been a foe to? Ah, surely it couldn't be what I surmised!—still,
I shall have to see it for myself. These men have taken the path that runs by
the Kollidam; I shall choose the one that skirts the Manni River. True, that
route is even more densely forested than this one—but when have forests,
hills, sticks, stones and rocks ever mattered to me? I'm the one to be feared
more!
Azhwarkkadiyaan mumbled all this and a great deal more to himself, as he
slipped down to the ground, from the tree. He walked steadily to the south,
reached the Manni River, turned left along its banks, and picked up his pace
He journeyed through dense forest, through endless paths without meeting a
soul. Hours later, he finally reached the temple-monument at
Thiruppurambiyam.
Dusk had set in—and the sun was slipping down the horizon.
Glossary:
On Exclamations and Hidden Meanings: The phrase Kalki uses at the
beginning of this chapter, when he writes about Azhwarkkadiyaan's
thoughts about Vandhiyathevan, is this:
“Indha vaaliban mikap pollaadhavanaayirukkiran;
nuzhaindhaal, ivan kolathil nuzhaikiraan …”

naam

thattiyil

Such were the words commonly used to describe someone's cunning. A
thatti is a closely-packed fence made of twigs; so dense that no one can get
through. A kolam is a rice-flour drawing, at the entrance of Thamizh
homes, usually geometrical. To slip into someone's home through a kolam
is well-nigh impossible. But Vandhiyathevan, according to

Azhwarkkadiyaan (who is no dud himself), seems to possess even this
fantastic talent.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 19

Murder, Mayhem, and a Forest of Terrors
It was the custom in ancient Thamizhagam, to erect memorial stones in
honour of men who had embraced a warrior's death in battle. Were it just a
stone, it would be called a Nadukal Koil—a simple monument erected in
their memory. Were a deity to be installed within its confines, and the
precincts made a temple, however, it was the norm to refer to it as a
pallipadai.
Such a monument existed a little away from the village of
Thiruppurambiyam, on the northern banks of the Manni River—roughly
half a kaadham, northwest of the city of Kudandhai; it had been erected in
the memory of the fallen Ganga king, Prithvipathi.
Historians are often wont to describe the battles of Waterloo, Panipet and
Plassey as critical events that changed the very course of history as we
know it; the battle at Thiruppurambiyam was one such, when it came to
Thamizh history. Having taken place a hundred years before this story
opens, it is important that our readers understand its significance.
The Chozha dynasty, which boasted such great Emperors as Karikal
Valavan, Perunarkilli, Ilanjetchenni and Thodiththot Chembian, was fated to
be shrouded in darkness, around five or six hundred years after their
glorious rule, eclipsed by the steady rise of Pandiyas down south and the
Pallavas to the North. Struggling to breathe, crushed as they were by these
mighty giants, the Chozhas were forced to do the unthinkable: leave
Uraiyur, their capital for centuries, behind. Eventually, they travelled in the
direction of Kudandhai and settled upon Pazhaiyarai, in its vicinity and
soon established themselves in this capital city—but never, for a moment,
did they forget that it was Uraiyur that had possessed this distinction in the
first place. Neither did they give up their claims to the honorific, “Kozhi
Vendhar,” which had connections to that famed city.

Among the Chozha kings who rose to Prominence in Pazhaiyarai,
Vijayalaya could, perhaps, be said to be among the greatest: a veteran of
many battles, ninety-six battle scars anointed his body, proclaiming his
valour.
Many were the songs sung in praise of this warrior, who thought nothing of
his life and body, when he went into battle.
“Enkonda thonnootrin melumiru moonru
Punkonda vetrip puravalan …”
went one, while another said,
“Punnuru thanrirumeniyir poonaagath
thonnoorum aarum sumanthonum!”
Thus did poets sing of his scars and battle prowess, years later. His son,
Adhithan, was equally famed for his valour, and earned honours in a good
many battles on his own account.
Having lived a full life, Vijayalaya Chozha had just carried out his biggest
duty in crowning his son as the next King, and was finally prepared to enjoy
some respite. That, however, was not to be.
The Pallavas and Pandiyas, not content in ruling kingdoms of their own,
were now engaged in ferocious warfare. The Pandiya scion was called
Varaguna Varman; the Pallava ruler was honoured by the name Aparajitha
Varman. Neither, famed Emperors in their right, would concede victory;
they clashed again and again on the battlefield—which, as it turned, out,
was always on Chozha soil.
This was, naturally, a distressing circumstance; Chozha Nadu was
strangled, like a rooster caught in a clash between mammoths; its people
struggled to survive.
Even here, though, Vijayalaya found a way to turn the clash of titans to his
favour. He would gather his meager forces and join either the Pandiya or
Pallava forces, during each altercation. Victory and defeat came to him
alternately—but it could not be denied that Chozha men were rapidly
becoming infected by a fierce, warrior spirit.

It is common knowledge that Chozha Nadu is enriched by River Kaveri and
her many tributaries that crisscross the land; all these rivers split away,
south of the Kaveri. One and only tributary flows away from the Kollidam,
and passes between that great river and Kaveri: River Manni.
And it was on the northern banks of this river that the Pallavas and
Pandiyas fought a last, decisive, bloody battle. Both armies were almost
equal in their strength; the Ganga king Prithvipathi had joined hands with
Pallavas' Aparajitha Varman; so had Aditha Chozhan, with his men.
The Chozha Prince was well aware that his forces were paltry when
compared to the colossal armies under the command of the Pandiyas and
Pallavas; were the former to win, the Chozhas would be decimated into
nothing. It was a gamble, therefore, to attach his own tiny army with the
Pallavas but he did so, anyway—like the smaller Kaveri emptying itself
into the ocean.
Endless kaadham after kaadham resounded with the fury of bloody battle.
Armies, each comprising of the Ratha, Gaja, Thuraga and Pathaathi
regiments surged against each other like massive oceans. Elephants clashed
like mountains crashing against one another, shaking the very earth; the
cavalry stormed their enemy, while the spears borne by the warriors on their
mounts glinted like shards of lightning. Chariots splintered in all directions;
the clang and crash of swords and spears echoed to the heavens, while the
land quaked and shuddered.
Three days did war rage, without respite; by the end of that time, the
battlefield was submerged in an ocean of thick, red blood; elephants and
horses lay in dead, rotting heaps; broken chariots littered the red field, like
wrecked ships floating on a dead sea. Thousands of soldiers had fallen on
both sides.
Only a section of the Pallava forces remained, after such gory battle; even
these men were exhausted, practically drooping with fatigue. The Pandiya
Maravar soldiers, on the other hand, seemed to have gained a boon to never
tire in battle, and advanced upon their enemy with ill-concealed glee.
A hasty conference was held in Aparajitha Varman's tent: the Pallava King,
Prithvipathi of the Ganga kingdom and Aditha Chozha huddled together to
discuss the next course of action. It was obvious that they could not hold

out for long; a retreat to the northern banks of the River Kollidam stared
them in the face.
And then—a miracle occurred.
Vijayalaya Chozha, scarred with endless wounds from battle, practically
bed-ridden with infirmity and almost unable to stand on legs riddled with
injuries—had someone managed to arrive onto the battlefield. Should the
Pallavas ever retreat to the north of the Kollidam, the Chozhas were
doomed; it would be centuries before there would be any hope of regaining
their lost glory. Well aware of these circumstances, the old battle-hardened
lion had arrived on the battlefield—and now, growled a ferocious oath that
lent new life to the faltering Pallava warriors.
“An elephant—give me an elephant!” he pleaded.
“They have been completely decimated; we have none left,” came the
answer.
“A horse then—just one horse!”
“There are none alive,” was the depressed reply.
“Does Chozha Nadu possess at least two true warriors?” cried Vijayalaya,
desperate.
Two hundred answered his clarion call.
“Two—two of you, who possess a warrior's heart and strength, may hoist
me onto your shoulders and march into battle. The rest—follow us in twos,”
commanded that warrior among warriors. “Should the men who bear me
fall, the ones behind them shall carry me, in turn!”
Thus, two soldiers, each with the height and build of the famed Pandava
wrestler Bheemasena, promptly stepped forward and hoisted Vijayalaya
onto their shoulders.
“Now! Carry me to the battle, now!” roared the man.
Battle still raged furiously in a corner of the field; the marava warriors of
the southern lands were engaged in beating back the eastern soldiers.
Vijayalaya Chozha thus entered the battlefield, to almost certain defeat. He
marched in on the shoulders of two men, bearing a gleaming sword in each

hand, twirling it around like Thirumaal wielding his discus with supreme
confidence. He ploughed through enemy ranks, lopping of their heads
without pause or hesitation; no one, it seemed, could stop him.
And yes—his incredible courage had its effect: soldiers, who had hitherto
withdrawn, fatigued with battled, now began to creep forward. They stood
still, gaping at Vijayalaya's almost inhuman strength and valour. Slowly,
they encouraged each other, patted each other's backs—and began to enter
the battlefield with renewed vim and vigour.
In an instant, Jayalakshmi, the Goddess of Victory, had turned her
compassionate gaze towards the advancing warriors.
The Pallava commanders gave up their decision to retreat towards the north
of Kollidam. The three kings now joined together, along with their personal
regiments and re-entered the battlefield with new strength. Their
concentrated attack had its effect: the Pandiya soldiers fell back in retreat,
and turned their backs, stopping only until they reached the frontiers of their
own kingdom.
It was in this battle that the Ganga king, Prithvipathi embraced death,
having performed a great many valorous deeds. His men raised a memorial
stone in his honour and later, a pallipadai as well.
For a while afterwards, the battlefield lay bare and empty; not even a weed
straggled along the massacred ground. No one went there if they could help
it and soon, the forest began to creep over the land. Slowly but surely, the
jungle reclaimed the battlefield, and with it, the monument. Jackals made
their home among thick bushes; owls and other night-birds roosted in the
dark, gloomy trees. In course of time, the monument lost the few visitors
who had braved forest and wild animals for worship; the temple began to
fall apart. At the time of our story, it was practically in ruins.
It was here that Azhwarkkadiyaan arrived, at dusk. Terrifying demons,
carved in glorious detail guarded the crumbling ruins and glared balefully at
Nambi, from atop the edges of the temple's mandapam. Their stony stares
bounced off the rotund man harmlessly—he was hardly the type to be
nervous at their presence. Azhwarkkadiyaan sprang as nimbly as he could
onto the roof of the monument's mandapam, and scrambled to hide himself

among a few tree branches. His sharp eyes were capable of cutting across
the dense gloom; his ears perked, ready to catch the slightest sound.
The sun sank beyond the horizon. A naazhigai passed—then two, and three.
Night lay on the forest like a heavy blanket; to Azhwarkkadiyaan, the
murky darkness was stifling. Occasionally, something rustled through the
foliage—ah, there is a weasel, climbing up a tree! And here, an owl
screeches through the night. Some kind of bird flutters through the trees,
alarmed by the approaching weasel. And yes—jackals have begun to howl.
Something rustled above him; Azhwarkkadiyaan craned his neck up. A
squirrel or a chameleon—he was not quite sure which—scrambled up the
branches.
He could see patches of the night sky through the thick, leafy branches.
Stars winked down at him. Struggling to be comfortable among the stifling
branches in splendid isolation, waiting for God knew what, stars in the
heavens seemed to be the only friendly souls he could see.
Azhwarkkadiyaan began, it must be admitted, a one-sided conversation
with them. “Ah, beloved stars, that swim in the waters of the night! You
look like you're laughing at the stupidity of us humans down here. I suppose
you have reason to. After all, you were witness to the bloody battle that was
fought here a hundred years ago, weren't you? And the rivers of blood that
bathed these very lands. I'm quite sure you're wondering why humans
should be at each other's throats all the time, or be so fond of spilling blood.
You see, most humans would call this valour.
A man has been dead for a hundred years—and yet, they call him their foe!
This, you see, is apparently the enemy's monument. They're going to confer
about destroying the lives of those alive—in a temple dedicated to a dead
man! Why wouldn't you laugh, my friends? Of course you will—by all
means, do!”
Good God, is all this a wild goose chase, then? Am I doomed to be cramped
between these branches all night? Are those men never going to arrive?
Perhaps my ears were at fault, and I heard them wrong? Or, perhaps, those
fish-signing men had simply changed their minds and gone elsewhere? Ah,
what a disappointment, if so? Should nothing happen here tonight, I shall
never forgive myself—wait! There—there's a light. Ah, now it's gone. Now I

see it again. There's no doubt about it, someone approaches with a torch.
No, there are two men. My wait was not in vain —!
The two newcomers walked a little beyond the pallipadai, towards a little
clearing, in the dense jungle. One sat down; the other held aloft the torch
and looked around, obviously expecting someone else. A while later, two
more men arrived—obviously, they were no strangers to this place. Else,
how could they possibly find their way here, in pitch darkness?
The latest arrivals spoke something to the men already assembled—but
Azhwarkkadiyaan heard nothing of their conversation. Adada, what a waste
of all his efforts—why, it looked like he wouldn't even be able to recognize
these plotters!
Two more men arrived; the rest spoke amongst themselves again. The last
of them held a bag in his hand; he turned it, mouth towards the ground—
and gold coins tumbled to the earth, glinting in the torch-light.
“My friends!” The man with the bag let loose a maniacal chortle. “Witness
the beginning of Chozha Nadu's destruction at our hands—with gold from
her own coffers! Excellent, wouldn't you say?” And he laughed even more.
“Lower your voice, Ravidasar,” advised one. “Let's not scream everything
to the high heavens.”
“Ah, but who is going to eavesdrop on us in this desolate jungle? Jackals,
owls and weasels, perhaps?” snorted the afore-mentioned. “But they won't
tell on us, thankfully.”
“Even so, it's safer to talk in low tones, isn't it?”
And then they really did begin to converse in murmurs—which,
unfortunately, did not bode well for Azhwarkkadiyaan at all, whose ears
were not sharp enough to divine their words. There was no point, he
thought, in staying atop the monument—perhaps he ought to climb down
and approach them. For he had to know what they spoke—he had to. And if
there be any danger that came with eavesdropping on them—so be it.
Azhwarkkadiyaan duly made an attempt to slip down from his perch—but
his body brushed against the tree, rustling the foliage.
Two of the men sprang up with a growl. “Who is there?”

Azhwarkkadiyaan's heart skipped a few beats. There was no way out, now,
but to make his escape. And even then, they would certainly hear him
rushing through the jungle, wouldn't they?
At this moment—an owl spread out its wings. “Oom—oom!” it hooted, as it
flapped its wings in the still night.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 20

“The first foe!”
Azhwarkkadiyaan delivered a deeply heartfelt thanks to the owl that had
just fluttered through the trees—for, the men gathered in the clearing
promptly assumed that the bird had been responsible for the noise.
“Adei, how dare this stupid bird startle us? Slay the wretched thing at
once!” exclaimed one.
“No, stay! Let's keep our swords and knives sharp for other, worthy
purposes—such as beheading our enemies, and destroying their very roots,”
advised Ravidasan. “What have owls and night-birds ever done to us, after
all? They are, in fact, our friends—unlike other men, they're awake all
hours of the night, aren't they? Just like us?
Azhwarkkadiyaan, listening to this speech, crept forward on noiseless feet
towards a towering marudha tree. More than a hundred years old, the
ancient one's thick roots had sprawled all over the ground. There were large
spaces between one gnarly root and another, and even a cozy hollow
underneath the trunk. Azhwarkkadiyaan made the best of his hidey-hole,
leant against the tree and eavesdropped for all he was worth.
“Where gold is concerned, we're secure as long as Thanjavur's royal
treasury continues to patronize us,” began Ravidasan. “All we need, now, is
the courage to carry out our pledge, and the strength to keep our secret safe,
until our work is done. Hear this: we must split ourselves into two groups—
one will leave for Ilankai; the other will journey towards Thondai
Mandalam, and await the right opportunity to carry out their task. And
remember—both must be complete at exactly the same time! Should we
allow for the slightest lapse after the first foe's demise, the second will be
on the alert. And that, we must never allow. Now—which of us is prepared
for the task in Ilankai?”

“I will!”—“No, let me!” clamoured several voices all at once.
“We'll decide that by and by, at our next meeting in Pandiya Nadu—but
there are a few things that must be completed before we get to it.”
“Which would be the best route to Ilankai?” queried someone.
“Kodikkarai is an excellent option, should we choose the sea-route. But
travelling to it, in the first place, would be perilous—there are a great many
enemies about, not to mention every spy in the land. Far better to journey
towards Sethu instead, cross the sea and land at Mathottam, or thereabouts.
Those who opt for the Ilankai mission must be prepared to paddle a boat, a
canoe, and swim in the sea competently. Which of us here can do the last?”
“I can!”—“So can I!” came several enthusiastic answers.
“Our first task in Ilankai would be to call upon King Mahindan—nothing
can be decided without an audience with him. Therefore, it becomes
important that at least one of those journeying to Ilankai knows the Sinhala
language. Ah—but where's our Soman Saambavan? Hasn't he arrived yet?
Did anyone amongst us see him, before this?”
“Here I am,” came a voice very near Azhwarkkadiyaan, and that worthy
almost jumped out of his skin.
Nambi practically plastered himself to the tree, mourning, not for the first
time, his rotund physique that simply would not let him conceal himself
anywhere, in peace.
He was just in time to notice two more men join the gathering.
Azhwarkkadiyaan peered around the tree a very little, and caught sight of
them: they were, indeed, the ones he had spied talking under the arasu tree,
on the banks of the Kollidam.
“Welcome!” exulted Ravidasan. “I was concerned that you might have been
in danger—that perhaps you wouldn't arrive at all. Which path did you
choose, and from where?”
“We followed the path along the Kollidam—but a group of jackals
surrounded us on the way, and we had a difficult time escaping them,”
explained Soman Saambavan.

“I can understand fearing lions and tigers—but why would anyone run
scared of jackals?” mocked one of the men. “What can we expect of those
who falter at the sight of them, pray?”
“Ah, but that's where you're wrong. One can confront ferocious lions and
tigers—they attack alone, face-to-face, and it's easy to get the better of
them. Jackals, now—those wretched animals always hunt in large groups
and are stronger, as a result. Wasn't that how those Chozha jackals hunted
down our illustrious king, who was caught all alone? Would he have lost his
precious life if he hadn't been mown down by those cowardly scavengers?”
“We shall hunt down and destroy those dastardly jackals—right down to the
last little pup!” Soman Saambavan growled an oath.
“And behold!—the tools of such destruction,” and Ravidasan displayed the
heap of gold coins glinting in the torch-light.
Soman Saambavan picked up one, and inspected it carefully. “The emblem
of a tiger on one side—and a palm-tree on the other!” he exclaimed.
“Indeed. Chozha gold—with the Pazhuvettarayar's emblem. I, as you see,
have kept my promise,” announced Ravidasan. “What about you, now? I
expect Idumbankaari has some news for us?”
“He has, and quite ready to tell you.”
Idumbankaari, accordingly, began his tale: “I have duly followed your
instructions, and am now employed in the Sambuvaraiyar household as a
servant. But it was only yesterday that I had the chance to stumble upon
something important. The Sambuvaraiyars hosted a banquet last night, and
a great many lords were present—Pazhuvettarayar, Vanangamudi
Munaiyarayar, Mazhapadi Mazhavarayar and the like. The Velan Dance and
Kuravai Koothu were performed, and the Devaralan delivered a few
predictions that will aid our mission very well. Everyone believed that
Pazhuvettarayar's young queen had accompanied him in her closed
palanquin. Pazhuvettarayar gave the news that King Sundara Chozha was
quite ill, and not likely to survive much longer. Then, all of them decided
that Aditha Karikalar did not deserve to be crowned king, but
Madhuranthaka Devar, in his place. Some of them entertained doubts about
the pious prince's willingness to ascend the throne. Pazhuvettarayar
declared that they would receive Madhuranthakar's answer from his own

lips, and threw open the palanquin's curtains—and the prince himself
stepped out! He was very eager to accept the crown, too …”
“And so, they're falling all over themselves to crown a warrior who travels
in a closed palanquin like a woman? Excellent! Everything aids our plan, I
believe—it suits our purposes very well, to have unrest among the Chozhas
themselves. No one will ever suspect us, at any point, will they? You've
brought great news, Idumbankaari, but tell us—how did you learn of all
this? How did such a circumstance ever come about?”
“It was me they placed me as a sentry, while they talked among themselves
at midnight about their precious royal affairs. I did guard, all right—but I
used my eyes and ears as well.”
“And—did you manage to learn anything more, while you did?”
“Yes. Someone else was watching the midnight meeting and learning all he
could—from the top of the fort-wall!”
“Ah—and who was he?”
“A top-knotted Vaishnavite.”
“Him! And what did you do? Didn't you turn him over to Sambuvaraiyar?”
“No—you see, I thought he might be one of ours. I even wondered if you
had sent him.”
“A very grave mistake. He isn't ours—that short, stout man, who picks
quarrels with everyone he meets. His name is Thirumalaiyappan, although
he's been known to call himself Azhwarkkadiyaan on occasion.”
“Yes, that's him. And I realized my error this very afternoon.”
“Did you? How?”
“One of Kandamaran's childhood friends arrived last night as well—but I
learned that he had nothing to do with Pazhuvettarayar's meetings; he went
to bed in a corner and slept the night away. This morning, I knew that the
young master was due to escort his friend to the banks of the Kollidam, and
I crossed his path a few times. My ruse worked—he asked me to
accompany him. He stopped on the north bank, but asked me to cross the
river and get a horse for his friend. I asked him permission to visit my aunt
in Kudandhai—which is how I was able to buy the time to come here.”

“This is all very well—but how did you learn the truth about that
Vaishnavite?”
“He clambered into the boat just as it was about to leave the north banks,
and made some sharp speech with Kandamaran's friend. Something in his
conversation made me suspicious. I wondered if he was perhaps, part of our
group. He was loitering about on the south bank too, and I believed that he
might have been waiting for me. I showed him our secret sign, but he didn't
recognize it. That was how I understood that he had nothing to do with us
—”
“You did what? Ah, what a grievous mistake! You shouldn't have shown
him our secret sign, never. Listen carefully, my friends—our tasks have
been defined for us, in both Kanchi and Ilankai, for that is where our
enemies reside. But there is one who is far more dangerous than either of
them—who would destroy us in a moment. And that is Thirumalaiyappan,
who wanders about under the false name of Azhwarkkadiyaan. He's sworn
to ruin us and our mission—he will do everything he can to carry away our
beloved protector, our queen, from us. Should any of you ever meet him at
any time, anywhere, do not hesitate even for a single moment: take your
knives and plunge it into his heart. Should you have no weapon, use your
hands and strange him to death. Poison him if your can; throw him into a
river and make him a meal for crocodiles; sweet-talk him to some cliff-top,
and push him to his death! Treat him as you would a poisonous snake,
scorpion or insect, and crush him mercilessly under your feet. It would be
best if you could actually manage to sacrifice him to Goddess Durga or
Kannaki. Do not hesitate or pity him for even a moment—for he will
continue to hinder us in every way he can, as long he's alive —!”
“He must be a vastly cunning creature for you to deliver such threats,
Ravidasar. Who is he?”
“Who, you ask? A Chozha spy, unmatched in skills and treachery.”
“Yes, but—whose?”
“Now that's something I've been wondering about for quite a while, myself.
I speculated that he might be spying for Sundara Chozha or Aditha
Karikalan, perhaps, but that was not the case. Now, I suspect he might be
working for that old hag in Pazhaiyarai, the Periya Piratti.”

“Truly? Ah, but isn't she supposed to have devoted all her time in worship
of Siva Peruman and renovating temples? Why would such a lady need the
services of any spy?”
“All a pretense, I tell you. That woman play-acts with her devotion to Siva
Peruman just as that Vaishnavite does, with his precious Thirumaal. What
sort of a demon doesn't wish her only son to ascend the throne and rule as
king? Why, her own brother Mazhavarayan doesn't see eye to eye with her,
and has joined Pazhuvettarayar, hasn't he?”
“Ravidasar, are there any others like this top-knotted devil?”
“I have my suspicions about an astrologer in Kudandhai. He lures people
under the guise of predicting their futures and picks their brains, I've heard.
Remember—none of you must ever set foot within his home. He's sure to
trick you into revealing something.”
“Who do you think he spies for?”
“I haven't been able to find that out, yet. Perhaps he answers to the false
prince in Ilankai? But no matter—the astrologer is of little account. I do not
count him a danger. It's the Vaishnavite I'm worried about—as I said, crush
him without remorse, the instant you see him!”
Perspiration drenched Azhwarkkadiyaan, who stood behind the marudha
tree, listening to this terrifying speech, quaking with terror. Was he even
going to escape here with his life? Somehow, the possibility did not seem to
exist, at that moment.
As if to make matters worse, something had gotten into his nose—and he
felt the overpowering urge to sneeze. Nambi tried desperately to stop it; he
even stuffed a cloth up his nostrils—to no avail. Sneeze he did—a tiny,
muffled sound.
The west wind no longer whirred through the foliage. The forest was still.
Not even the trees murmured.
Azhwarkkadiyaan's hastily suppressed sneeze, therefore, actually did fall on
the men's ears.
“I hear something behind that marudha tee,” said Ravidasan, at once. “One
of you—take a torch and see what it might be.”

Someone obligingly did so; Azhwarkkadiyaan could hear him walk towards
him. The torch's light began to glow steadily brighter. Ah—he was almost
at the tree—the torch-light would fall on him—and—and—what next? If
Azhwarkkadiyaan ever managed to escape this terrifying ordeal –
His heart fluttered madly; Nambi glanced around him, looking in vain for
some means of escape. Nothing seemed to offer him a way out. He looked
up—and glimpsed a giant bat hanging upside down from one of the
branches, seemingly lost in penance. An idea tickled his fertile brain; he
came to a swift conclusion. To think was to act; Azhwarkkadiyaan reached
up, grabbed the bat and held it in his hands. The instant the torch-bearer
appeared around the tree—he threw it in the man's face.
The torch fell to the forest floor, and began to dim. The man who had
received a face full of bat floundered, slurring various unintelligible
phrases: “Ei—ei—what—where!”
Sounds of many feet thundering towards him—and Azhwarkkadiyaan
decided that this was his moment. He ran for all his worth and disappeared,
into the dense forest.
“What is it?”—“what happened?” came a barrage of questions, and the man
who had sustained a bat-attack began to recount his terrifying adventure in
some detail.
For quite a while after he had made his escape, their speech echoed in
Thirumalaiyappan's nervous ears.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 21

The Rustling Curtain
Could two minds exist within a man at the same time? To Vandhiyathevan,
it seemed that they could.
At the moment, he was journeying through some of Chozha Nadu's most
flourishing landscapes. It was the time of the year when rivers overflowed;
canals, streams and brooks bubbled and gushed with fresh water that poured
into fields; water seemed to overwhelm every part of the land. Ah, truly, the
name Vala Nadu suited this country—for it well nigh burst with nature's
bounty. And it was appropriate, thus, to call the King of this realm Valavan,
too.
Speaking of land and kings—his mind flew, at once, to the various perils
that seemed threaten the one he was travelling through, and its ruler. He
couldn't help but wonder about his mission and its consequences. What was
he supposed to do, now? Deliver Prince Aditha Karikalar's palm-leaf to
King Sundara Chozha and wash his hands off this terrible business? Why
must he poke his nose, after all, into this royal quagmire of cousins,
kingship and conspiracies? What did he care about Sundara Chozha's
successor, after all? Weren't they, in a way, the sworn enemies of his clan?
Hadn't it been a coalition of the Chozhas, Gangas and Vaithumbars that had
destroyed the Vaanar dynasty? Aditha Karikalar might consider him a
friend today—but did that mean that he, Vandhiyathevan must forget every
injustice the Chozhas had committed in the past—ah, no, no, this was
ridiculous. To call invasion and war unfair was, well, unfair. Which king,
after all, hadn't tried his very best to conquer his neighbour? Every ruler in
history had tried to subjugate another; victory and defeat were very much a
part of their lives. It was entirely natural too, for those vanquished to
cherish the deepest hatred towards their victors—even if such hatred was
rather pointless. Good heavens, hadn't Vandhiyathevan's own ancestors

committed every atrocity known to them, during their own quest for
greatness? Weren't they guilty of the same unjust practices in their time?
What was that song that used to be so celebrated, once …? Ah, there it was:
“Senai thazhaiyakki senguruthi neerthekki
Aanai mithitha arunchetril—Manaparan
Paavendhar thamvendhan Vaanan parithu nattaan
moovendhar thangal mudi!”
His own people had once engaged in fierce battles, destroyed men and
beasts, and roared in approval as they beheaded enemies gleefully and stuck
them in the bloody mud of battlefield, churned by war-elephants. Truth be
told, dishonour was always the fate of those who lost in battle. Not every
king could be as gracious and compassionate as King Rama, or Yudhishtra
of the Pandavas, surely? And if one were honest with himself—wasn't their
compassion the very reason for their terrible sufferings in jungles? What
had they lacked, after all, when it came to men, kingdoms or riches? Their
large-heartedness had yielded nothing but penury and anguish. Ah, no—
there was no room for pity in royal affairs. In fact, the Chozhas were, if
anything, rather inclined to lenience: they much preferred diplomacy and
tact, rather than war with their enemies. Witness the many alliances forged
through marriages between them and various, supposedly enemy clans?
King Sundara Chozha's father Arinjaya Chozha himself, had wedded
Kalyani, a princess of the Vaithumbarayar dynasty—which explained the
beautiful features and good looks of Sundara and his children
Speaking of beauty—memories floated up, of the young woman from
Kudandhai, whom he had seen again, on the banks of the Arisilaaru. Well
no, not really. He hadn't just thought of her—her memory had been
smouldering deep within, all this while.
Thus far, he had been gazing open-mouthed at Chozha Nadu's natural
beauty, and musing over the many dangers that seemed to surround their
royal family—but underneath, had been thoughts of the beautiful young
lady who had captured his imagination so completely. Now, he gave up all
pretence of plodding over conspiracy theories and engaged himself in the
far more appealing task of thinking of her. Everything of Chozha Nadu,
now, seemed to remind him of her beautiful features. Smooth bamboo
shoots put him in mind of her slender shoulders; dark water-lilies flowering

in profusion in the many ponds he passed, recalled to him her large, limpid
eyes; he wondered, quite seriously, if the pink and white lotuses he spotted
were any match to her golden countenance. And the musical buzz of honeybees in the trees he rode under—could they possibly rival her sweet voice?
Certainly, poets did their best to compare nature's beauty with women, but
truth be told—such comparisons were ridiculous. How could flowers, bees
and bamboo shoots possibly equal her majestic beauty? Ah, the thrill in his
veins when he first set eyes on her! How his heart flutters even now, just at
her memory? No bud or bee could ever inspire such a thrill in him, could it?
Now this was madness in the extreme. His elders had warned him again and
again, of the wiles of women—it took a great man to escape their cunning
lures. All the more reason why he should steer clear of them, if he ever
hoped to make something of his life. Why, he didn't have to look far—there
was Kovalan of the epic Silappathikaaram, whose life was destroyed
because of women. Or wait, why take him as an example, anyway? There
was Periya Pazhuvettarayar, warrior among warriors, Treasurer of the
Empire—and the laughing-stock of his people—all because he had tumbled
into love, recently. Ah, but people were silly and ignorant—they little knew
who he squired around in his closed silk palanquin. If they but guessed –
And why must Prince Madhuranthakar demean himself this way? Chee!
Was this the way a man behaved—shutting himself up in palanquins and
travelling around the country in the guise of Pazhuvettarayar's young wife?
Did he really cherish ambitions to ascend the Chozha throne with such
humiliating tactics? If so, how could he ever hope to rule this empire?
Anything he did would have to be under the aegis of Pazhuvettarayar and
his lordly cohorts—but then, why blame only Madhuranthakar? If anything,
it was Sundara Chozha who had committed a grievous blunder by allowing
them such powers and authority—especially when he had two excellent
sons who were more than capable of ruling the country. Not to mention a
lovely daughter, famed far and wide for her intelligence and good sense …
Ah, that majestic young lady—she whom he had marveled at, both on the
river's banks and the astrologer's home—her face seemed strangely familiar,
somehow. Why—could it possibly be—no; that was silly, it couldn't—but
oh, what if it were?

If his sudden suspicions were true—ah, then Vandhiyathevan was certainly
a fool to beat all fools—and possibly, the most unfortunate among men, too.
For he had just met the young lady whose fame was spread everywhere
from the hoary Vindhya mountains to the tip of Ilankai—and had behaved
like the most ill-mannered lout.
Good heavens, he certainly hoped she wasn't who he suspected she was.
How could he ever dare to even look at her, when he tried to deliver her
brother's palm-leaf ?
Vandhiyathevan trotted along the road edging the Kaveri, pondering over
everything from sky to earth, until he reached Thiruvaiyaaru.
Ah! Truly, this was a town with no equal, when it came to prosperity and
beauty! He confirmed with passersby that this was indeed that temple-town,
and discovered that in this case, rumour had done a grave injustice to its
charm and loveliness. Why, the boy-saint Gnana Sambandar's description of
it in the divine Thevaram, stayed true even now—three hundred years had
made no difference whatsoever. Witness the glorious foliage along the
banks of the river—the luscious jack-fruits that hung heavily from their
trees! Such richness was a rare sight indeed, in Thondai Nadu. And here
were monkeys, eager to sample nature's delights—how they ever caught the
scents of fruits, one never knew. He could never grow tired of their antics.
Now, what was it that Sambandar had sung—ah, yes, he remembered it
now:
In Thiruvaiyaaru, young dancers performed on appropriately placed
platforms at street-corners; drums beat a glorious rhythm to match their
song and dance. Now the monkeys, playing among trees mistook the
muffled roar of drums for thunder—and clambered up the highest branches,
craning their necks in vain, searching for dark clouds, heavy with the
promise of rain! Ah, those words were true even now: monkeys still
scampered along trees, and that was not all; he could hear the faint musical
strains of song and dance, floating out from within the town as well. There
—he can hear instruments playing: the yaazh, kuzhal, muzhavu and
thannumai—while the gentle tinkling of anklets accompanied them.
Obviously, these dancers weren't the possessed, frantic Kuravai Koothu
performers of Kadambur—their song was far more melodious, and their

Bharathanatyam aspired to far better standards. Why, he could even hear
their teachers, who beat a steady rhythm with their little batons:
“Kolodak kolvalaiyaar kuthaadak
Kuvimugaiyaar mugathininru
Selodach chilaiyaada seyizhai
Yaar nadamaadum thiruvaiyaare!”
Ah, Saint Sambandar was undoubtedly a great Saivite—but even more
important, he understood and appreciated beauty in all its forms. The
Thiruvaiyaaru he had described stayed true to his description even today.
Vandhiyathevan decided that he would stay a day here, and spend it looking
at the sights to his fill. He would also take the time to visit the renowned
temple and worship at the feet of Aiyaarappar, Lord of the Five Rivers, after
which the town took its name—and his divine consort, Aram Valartha
Nayaki, She who was the very form of Righteousness. Ah, the very sight of
so many Siva devotees praying along the banks of Kaveri, their bodies
covered in sacred ash, was calming indeed. Why, sometimes, their chorus of
heartfelt chants, “Namachivaaya!” rose and drowned out the songs from the
town itself. And there was someone, singing Sambandar's songs, in a
melodious voice. Truly, this town was blessed by the very Siva Peruman, to
be the abode of culture, and piety. Yes, he certainly would stay here a day
and take in the sights! After all, where was the guarantee that he could enter
the fort of Thanjavur? And even if, by some hook or crook he did, how on
earth would he ever gain an audience with King Sundara Chozha? Wasn't
the man well nigh imprisoned by the Pazhuvettarayar brothers, after all—a
bird in a golden cage? Well, well, his way was clear: he would cross over to
the Kaveri's north banks, and –
Just as Vandhiyathevan arrived at this part of his ruminations, something
occurred to distract him: from the west arrived a palanquin, along the path
edging the Kaveri, with soldiers guarding it front and back.
Suspicion touched Vandhiyathevan's mind; he waited until it came closer—
and it was just as he had thought: the thick curtains that covered the sides of
the palanquin bore the emblem of a palm-tree. It probably came from
Kadambur—he had arrived here from Kudandhai, while they had probably

chosen another path. But where was Pazhuvettarayar? Perhaps he had opted
to stay somewhere on the way?
The palanquin turned south, towards the road to Thanjavur—and
Vandhiyathevan changed his mind in an instant. Thiruvaiyaaru could wait;
he would follow this palanquin. As to why he made that split-second
decision, he did not quite know. All he was sure of, at that moment, was
that the palanquin bore Madhuranthaka Devar—and his scorn for that man
grew.
Still—that was not important, now. Perhaps he would gain an opportunity to
meet the prince, later on. The palanquin-bearers may set it down, at some
point; Madhuranthaka Devar may step out. He, Vandhiyathevan might have
a God-given chance to make his acquaintance with the prince—which
might serve some purpose, later. Why, it might even gain him entrance
within Thanjai, and an audience with the King! He might have to resort to
subterfuge to make it work—but then, such stratagems and tactics were
highly necessary to gain his own ends. After all, he was on a royal mission,
wasn't he?
To think was to act: Vandhiyathevan let the palanquin go forward a
distance, before following them. He was doomed to disappointment,
however—none of the circumstances he had anticipated presented
themselves. Four more rivers on the route between Kaveri and Thanjavur
came and went but so far, the palanquin had shown no signs of a halt. The
bearers seemed bent on going ahead without a pause, in fact and—there, the
towers, turrets and fort-walls of Thanjavur could be glimpsed, towering
above the trees. Vandhiyathevan could even see the gates, at one point. If
the palanquin entered the fort, he might as well give up all hopes of acting
upon his ruse! He'd have to gather his courage and hit upon some clever
ploy, to accomplish his aim. After all, what could he possible lose? His
head? What of it? Where was the purpose in returning home without
accomplishing his mission? And then, he was furious with Madhuranthaka
Devar as well—this weak-willed idiot who travelled about like a woman.
His hands fairly itched to throw open the palanquin's silk screen and expose
this imposter; his heart raced with the desperate need to tell the world that
within was not a dainty woman, but a grown man.

Even as he was thinking of a way to do all the above, one of the soldiers,
part of the vanguard of the palanquin, fell back, and subjected
Vandhiyathevan to a keen scrutiny. “Who might you be, my man? Why do
you follow us?” came the sharp query.
“I'm not,” answered Vandhiyathevan. “I'm travelling to Thanjavur myself—
this is the road to the city, isn't it?”
“Yes—but it may be used only by dignitaries and other such personages,”
shot back the soldier. “There is another path for commoners.”
“Indeed? Well, I happen to be a very important personage indeed.”
“Are you, now?” the soldier smiled a little. “What is your purpose in
Thanjai?”
“I've received news that my uncle is very ill,” Vandhiyathevan gabbled. “I
wish to visit him.”
“Indeed? And what is he? An employee in the royal palace, perhaps?”
“Not at all. He's a caretaker in an inn.”
“Oh? But in that case, why lag behind us? You could have gone forward,
couldn't you?”
“My horse is tired, Ayya. Do you really think I like staring at your backs?”
Vandhiyathevan had trotted forward even as this conversation took place—
and now, the ruse he had been searching in vain for, burst in upon him in all
its glory. Instantly, he pressed upon his steed, reined it in and then let it
loose upon the palanquin-bearers in the back. They stared back at him,
startled.
At once, Vandhiyathevan set up a yell. “Ayyo! Maharaja—My King! Your
palanquin-bearers are attacking my horse! Ayyo, ayyo!”
The silk curtains adorning the palanquin rustled.
Glossary:
Yudhishtra: First of the five Pandava brothers, and who, reputedly, never
told a lie. True to the mien of such noble men, he and his brothers suffered
greatly.

Kovalan: The hero of Ilangovadigal's famous epic, Silappathikaaram,
Kovalan, a merchant, was married to Kannaki, when he fell for the lures of
the courtesan Madhavi. He ignored his new bride and worshipped at
Madhavi's feet, but she, at one point, tired of him. Kovalan came back to his
senses and returned to his wife, who urged him to travel to Madurai, that
they might make a new beginning. Fate had other things in store for him,
though, and he met his death.
Of course, Kalki shows how Vandhiyathevan, like many men (and
according to the lessons many elders had imposed upon him), believes that
it was a woman who destroyed Kovalan's life—forgetting, quite
conveniently, that it was Kovalan himself who let his wife languish in
misery, and enjoyed a courtesan's company, thus destroying not his own
life, but his wife's as well. So much for being ruined by a woman, indeed.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 22

The Velakkara Regiment
The first to move was the outer curtain, etched with the palm-tree, emblem
of the Pazhuvettarayars. The next to rustle was the silk curtains within. And
before Vandhiyathevan's fascinated eyes, a golden hand crept out—just as
he had seen, once before. It would not be befitting of royal status for him to
remain on his horse, he decided. He leapt down at once and practically ran
towards the palanquin.
“Your Highness! My Prince!—your palanquin-bearers —!” he yelled, and
looked up. He stared at the face above him. Blinked, and stared even harder.
For, the vision that met his startled gaze well nigh blinded him with its
radiance.
“No, no—I—” Vandhiyathevan's tongue slipped and slurred; his throat went
dry. “I mean—no, it's—you're the Pazhuvoor Queer—er—Paluvoor Prince
—your—er—your horses knocked over my palanquin!” he finished, in a
magnificent display of supreme stupidity.
All this, naturally, had taken place within moments; the guards
accompanying the palanquin surrounded Vandhiyathevan almost at once. In
the almost subconscious way that is almost second nature to warriors, our
young man too, was aware of the soldiers around him; his hands crept to the
sword at his waist almost without his knowledge. And yet—and yet—he
simply could not take his eyes off the golden, radiant countenance of the
young woman, who peered at him from within the palanquin.
For it was not a prince, as he had fully expected, but a young woman—and
what a woman, indeed! Not in all his years had Vandhiyathevan ever
imagined that such beauty—beauty that could well turn men into beasts—
could exist.

Fortunately, some part of his brain seemed to possess its faculties—or at
least one nerve, which was sane enough. A strange impulse stole over him,
and he decided to act upon it at once.
He gathered every ounce of courage he possessed, and made a monumental
effort to work his tongue into speech. “I beg your pardon—but I am in the
gracious presence of Pazhuvoor's Ilaiya Rani, am I not? It was in the hope
of an audience with your highness that I travelled all this way!”
The young queen of Pazhuvoor fixed her lovely gaze on him. Her golden
countenance blossomed into a little smile—and it was as though a lotus bud
had unfurled its delicate petals, revealing a row of beautiful, radiant white
pearls. The sheer beauty of it dazzled Vandhiyathevan into speechlessness.
The soldiers surrounding the palanquin hesitated, seemingly waiting for
their young queen's command. She waved a regal hand at them, upon which
they retired to a discreet distance. Two soldiers reined in Vandhiyathevan's
horse, which still butted against the palanquin.
The young woman in the palanquin turned her gaze on Vandhiyathevan
again—two sharp spears pierced his heart at once.
“I am the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani,” spoke the lady—and oh, what was it that
made her voice so exquisite? This honeyed sweetness that made his head
spin? A drug that made him lose his very senses?
“Didn't you complain about something, just now?” she continued. “About
my palanquin-bearers?”
The velvety smoothness of the famed silks of Kasi—the intoxication of
spirits—the silky sweetness of forest honey—the dazzling brilliance of
lightning in the night sky—could a young woman's voice possibly be the
alluring combination of several of nature's incredible splendours?
“What was it that you said—something about my palanquin knocking into
your horse?”
A mocking smile widened her coral lips; obviously, she appreciated the
absurdity of it all.
Vandhiyathevan felt his courage rise, at her reaction. “Indeed, yes, my
queen. Your men did knock into my horse—look at how terrified it is!”

“It isn't just the horse that's terrified, I think—you had better ask the priest
at Goddess Durga's temple to cast away the evil eye with a clutch of neem
leaves.”
By now, Vandhiyathevan had recovered his wits completely, and even let
himself laugh a little at her words. But this, it seemed, was the sign for the
Pazhuvoor Queen's own mood to change. Her radiant smile vanished; her
face was now suffused with anger. The golden moon had vanished behind
storm-clouds.
“Keep the jests for later, and answer me: why did you let your horse run
into my palanquin? The truth now—or else …!”
Fortunately for Vandhiyathevan, he had hit upon an explanation, and gave
it, now. Glancing around to make sure that there was no chance of being
eavesdropped upon, he lowered his voice, as though sharing the most
intimate of secrets: “Devi—Nandhini Devi? It was Azhwarkkadiyaar—I
mean, Thirumalaiyappar—who charged me with a message to you. He
wished me to meet you—and that was why I had to devise such a ruse.
Again, I do beg your pardon!”
And Vandhiyathevan gazed into her face keenly, eager to know the effect of
his unexpected message. To be sure, it was a little like throwing a stone at a
fruit-laden tree: what would he receive, for his pains? A ripe fruit? Or a
sour one? The stone itself, perhaps—or some other, severe blow?
The Pazhuvoor queen's dark, shapely brows rose; her beautiful eyes stared
at him, brimming with surprise and suspicion. The next instant, that lady
seemed to have arrived at her decision. “Very well, but the middle of the
road is hardly the right place for a conversation. Our palace, tomorrow
evening—you may seek an audience, and we shall speak more of this.”
Vandhiyathevan's heart practically sang with delight. Ah, it looked like his
hoax had been a complete success! He had crossed three-quarters of the
well, as the saying went—all that remained now, was just a quarter more.
“But, but—Devi, how will I ever gain entrance into the fort? They won't let
me in—or the palace either,” he lamented, eager to cross this last hurdle as
well. “How may I see you?”
The Ilaiya Rani turned at once to a small silk pouch by her side, opened it
and took out an ivory ring. “Show this, and you will gain admission at once

—both into the fort, and our palace,” and she gave it to him.
Vandhiyathevan received it reverentially, sparing it a quick glance as he did
—the ring had the emblem of a palm-tree etched into it. By the time he
looked up again, the palanquin's silk curtains had fallen shut. Ah—even the
celestial snake Rahu eclipsed the moon so very slowly, in the heavens, but
these wretched curtains had closed over her fair, golden countenance within
moments!
“Take care, and don't follow us from hereon—it's far too dangerous,” came
her low voice from within. “Stay a while, and enter the fort later.”
The palanquin went on and with it, the guards as well. Vandhiyathevan
stood by, his horse's reins in his careful hands, allowing them to pass. On a
subconscious level, he did not fail to notice that one of the Pazhuvoor
guards—the one that had spoken to him—cast more than one glance at him
as he went by.
Consciously, however, he was still fascinated a great deal by the exquisitely
lovely Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani, journeying towards Thanjai in her palanquin.
Had his meeting with her truly happened? Had he really stood in front of
her and spoken a few words? And even more importantly—was it possible
for such astounding beauty to even exist on earth?
There were tales galore of celestial dancers such as Rambhai, Urvasi and
Menakai, who, it was said, adorned the abode of the Devas, and made even
sages and saints, who had renounced the world, insane with their beauty. In
this world too, there was a great deal of mocking talk about Periya
Pazhuvettarayar and his infatuation with his charming young wife—but
now, it seemed there was nothing surprising about it. Not the most biased of
men could ever call the battle-scarred, rugged warrior a handsome man—
while his young wife was a fair vision of beauty! It could hardly be
wondered at, if the old man was willing to sacrifice heaven and earth just to
win a smile from her.
Having spent a good deal of time by the roadside, immersed in thought,
Vandhiyathevan finally climbed on his horse, and set it trotting slowly
towards the Thanjai fort. The sun was sinking to the west, when he arrived
at the main gates.

The origins of Thanjai might be within the fort—but the straggling fingers
of civilization had reached forward, and the city proper now spread outside,
as well. Street upon street surrounded the fort, filled with vendors selling
mouth-watering foods, or full of workshops and smithies with laboring
workmen. Thoroughfares thronged with people buying, selling, all hurrying
upon important business, and almost choked with bullock-carts and horsedrawn chariots. Vandhiyathevan felt an intense desire to plunge into them,
and observe the lifestyle of those who lived in this sprawling, new capital
city of the Chozhas—but this, he regretfully decided, would have to wait.
There was work to be done, first; amusements could come later.
With this very creditable impulse, he approached the imposing main gates
of the fort—only to find that they were closed, firmly. Guards at the
entrance were moving people to the sides of the road; even more
importantly, the milling population obeyed. Far from going about their
business, they waited patiently, men, women, old men and even children, as
though keen on watching a procession of some sort.
The space directly in front of the fort's main entrance remained empty, save
the guards; Vandhiyathevan was filled with the urge to know what was
about to happen—but it was not his intention to stride up to the sentries and
demand an explanation of anything. Such a confrontation would only lead
to arguments and anger, and there was nothing he wished to avoid more, at
this point. His mission was his priority now—not mad bouts with wayfarers
or random soldiers.
Accordingly, Vandhiyathevan made himself merge with the people by the
roadside—yet, at a vantage point that would enable him to watch the
proceedings.
The strong scent of flowers assaulted his nose. He turned, and saw a young
man holding two full baskets of blooms. Liberally adorned with sacred ash
and rudraksha necklaces, he looked the very picture of a devout Saivite.
“Thambi—why is everyone gathered by the roadside, at this hour?”
Vandhiyathevan asked. “Is there about to be a procession or something?”
“Are you not from these parts, Ayya?”
“No—I come from the Thondai Mandalam.”

“That explains your question. Also, it would be better if you got down from
your horse, as well.”
It would be easier to talk to the youngster if he did get down,
Vandhiyathevan mused, and did—but that did not explain the young man's
suggestion. “Why didn't you want me to stay on my horse, thambi?”
“The Velakkara regiment is in audience with the Emperor now, paying their
respects to him. Soon, they will pour out of the fort. That is why everyone
has gathered here.”
“To watch them, I suppose?”
“Yes.”
“I too, might do so from my horse then, mightn't I?”
“You may, but beware of Velakkara soldiers who might spot you. It might
get—difficult.”
“Difficult, how? Will they steal my horse, do you mean?”
“Horse—and riders, on occasion. One never knows. They are rogues, those
men.”
“Is that how it is? And does everyone here put up with their antics?”
“What choice do they have? The Velakkara regiment rules everyone and
everything, these days. Their word is law. Not even the Pazhuvettarayars
interfere in their affairs.”
Commotion erupted within the fort walls, at this moment. Trumpets and
conches blew with abandon; nagara and parai drums thundered
enthusiastically, while several hundred voices shouted praises that echoed
to the skies.
Vandhiyathevan had heard a great deal about these valiant warriors. Their
fame had spread far and wide in Chozha Nadu, especially, as a force to
reckon with. In name, they were bodyguards to rulers—but there was an
important difference between them, and the Velakkara warriors. The latter
had sworn a blood oath; they were sworn to protect kings with their own
lives. Should any calamity befall those they had pledged to protect, due to
some sort of error, or oversight on the part the Velakkara regiment, they

would kneel in the presence of Goddess Durga, and behead themselves with
their own hands.
It was only natural, therefore, that warriors who had taken such a terrifying
oath be allowed a few privileges denied to others.
Padaar!—Padaar! The fortress gates swung open with a resounding crash.
Two soldiers rode out first on horseback, holding a flag aloft in their right
hands. Quite peculiar, its emblem: on a blood-red background was a tiger
and below it, a crown. Underneath was an offering platform, a balipeedam,
head cut off from its body, and a large sword. In all, the tiger flag presented
quite a gruesome picture.
An imposing bull followed the horsemen, carrying two enormous drums,
also known as the perigai; two men beat out a steady, thundering rhythm on
them.
Behind them came around fifty men, striking upon instruments such as the
siruparai, perumparai and thambattam, announcing their arrival in
stentorian terms. Fifty more men followed them, blowing upon huge,
curved horns: Baam—Baam!—Ba-baam!
A thousand men marched upon their footsteps; most of them chanting
praises lustily, until the very air rumbled around them, crackling with their
energy.
“Long live the illustrious Paranthaka Chakravarthy, Lord of the World!”
“Vaazhga vaazhga!”
“Long live King Sundara Chozha!”
“Vaazhga vaazhga!”
“Long life to the Kozhi Vendars!”
“Vaazhga vaazhga!”
“Long live the Lords of Thanjai!”
“Vaazhga vaazhga!”
“Long live the Lord Who Brought Veera Pandiya to his Knees!”
“Vaazhga vaazhga!”

“Long live the Rajakesari Who Conquered Madurai, Eezham and Thondai
Mandalam!”
“Vaazhga vaazhga!”
“Long live Karikala Chozha's illustrious descendents!”
“Vaazhga vaazhga!”
“May Goddess Durgai, Maakali, Parathapari Parasakthi be Victorious!”
“Velga! Velga!”
“May the tiger flag fly proud all over the world!”
“Velga! Velga!”
“Vetrivel!”
“Veeravel!”
Those who heard these valiant chants from a thousand throats felt their skin
prickle with emotion. The soldier's chants were echoed by other voices, as
they marched out of the gates; a good many people thronging the roads
joined in as well.
Thus it was that the route taken by the Velakkara Regiment overflowed with
emotion and energy, as they marched from the gates and through the streets
of Outer Thanjai, and disappeared into the distance.
Glossary:
Kalki's Note: The Velakkara Regiment, it's said, took its name from Lord
Muruga, one of whose titles was Velakkaran—He Who has Sworn an Oath
to Protect his Devotees.
Mohanangi; Sukumari; Bhuvana Mohini; Sundharangi: These are words
Kalki uses in the Thamizh original, in his description of Nandhini. The
words naturally mean a woman of bewitching beauty and are sometimes
used as proper names; the interesting part is that they are no longer in
vogue, in today's colloquial or literary Thamizh. These are words that have
their root in Sanskrit, and belong, therefore, to a bygone era. They are also
an excellent indicator of the timeline of the stories and writers, themselves.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 23

Amudhan's Mother
The Velakkara Regiment passed in grand fashion through the Large Market
Street—and the soldiers forming the tail-end indulged in a great many
“good deeds.” as they went. One, for instance, barged into a sweetmeats
shop, hoisted a whole basket of luscious, round adhirasams and distributed
them all to his friends. Then, he returned to the shop dutifully and crowned
the aghast shop-keeper with the empty basket, thereby earning raucous
appreciation from his mates and the watching passersby.
Another grabbed a flower-basket from an old woman walking by, and began
to pull apart the blooms in earnest. “Look—look—it's raining flowers!” he
yelled as everyone rushed about, trying to catch a few swirling petals. Yet
another halted a cart mid-street, yanked the bulls out of their harness and
broke a stick over their backs: the animals stomped and bucked madly
through the crowd, as the soldiers romped about in glee.
Vandhiyathevan watched their antics, carefully cloaked by the milling
throngs by the road. Ah, these men aren't very different from the Pazhuvoor
men, he mused. They run amuck through the crowd and are every bit a
nuisance to the people—what a good thing that I'm tucked away from their
sharp eyes! Else, there would have been a very pretty tussle and my
mission, in ruins.
And yet, he had not failed to notice an important difference, as well: the
people gathered here did not really seem irritated by the Velakkara soldiers'
antics; if anything, they joined in and romped around, as well.
Vandhiyathevan opened his mouth, prepared to comment about this peculiar
behaviour—but when he turned around, the youngster had vanished,
blooms, basket and all. He had probably wanted to get on with his work and
walked away.

Apparently, the Thanjavur fortress gates closed for good, once the
Velakkara Regiment passed through in the evenings and did not open for
anyone, except for members of the royal family, perhaps, or ministers and
Thandanaayakkas—who alone, it seemed, were privileged to enter and exit
any hour, day or night. The Pazhuvettarayars too, were proud possessors of
that concession, Vandhiyathevan learned. That could mean only one thing:
there was no point in trying to enter the fort tonight. The last thing he
wanted was to display his newly acquired palm-tree insignia, and be
subjected to the scrutiny of sentries, at dusk. Or even to find out its unique
gate-opening powers. Far better to stay the night here, take in the sights,
and enter the fort next morning. Besides, even if he did enter the city
tonight, somehow, he could hardly demand an audience with the king right
away and hand over his palm-leaf, could he?
Having made up his mind, Vandhiyathevan ambled through the streets
edging the fort-walls, drinking in the bustling city. His horse had travelled
many kaadhams that day, and was exhausted beyond belief; he knew that it
could not be expected to carry him any further. He would have to find some
food and shelter both for himself and his steed—or it would be completely
useless to him, next morning.
And Thanjai was such an attractive city, besides! Newly established, it was
beginning to expand very quickly, thriving and flourishing with business
and people. Twilight was falling as well: hundreds of lamps, lit by the
roadside, transformed it into a radiant sight.
The streets were practically bursting with people; many had arrived from
other towns and villages, bent on transacting business, and went about,
looking very important. Most were residents of Chozha Nadu, but
Vandhiyathevan's keen eyes spotted men who were obviously from lands
newly brought under Chozha dominions, as well. Travellers had converged
here, everywhere from the River Porunai to Paalaaru; from the east to west
coast. Why, some had even arrived from north of the Vindhya Mountains,
or from lands beyond the seas.
Customers attached themselves like demented flies to stalls that sold
savoury aappams and sweet adhirasams, buying them in dozens; other
stalls had bananas and a variety of fruits heaped in little mountains. As for
the flower-stalls—those fragrant corners were frankly, beyond description:

jasmine, mullai, aathi and shenbagam flowers rose like little hillocks, while
women buzzed around them like bees drawn to nectar.
Riding past them, Vandhiyathevan remembered the youngster and his
baskets of blooms. Ah, an acquaintance with him would have proven
convenient indeed—for he desperately needed food and lodgings for the
night.
Even as he thought this, he glimpsed the young man approaching him, in
the distance, and jumped down from his horse at once. “Why, thambi—you
don't have your baskets with you. What about the blooms? Sold them all?”
“Oh, those weren't for sale. I was taking them to the temple nearby, for the
evening's worship. I've delivered the flowers, so I'm on my way home,
now.”
“And which is the shrine that benefits by your service?”
“Have you heard of the Thalikulathaar Temple?”
“Ah—would that be the Thanjai Thalikulathaar? I've heard much about it.
And is it a large shrine?”
“No, only a small one. But these days, it's the Durgai Temple that receives
all the honours. That's the one where everyone celebrates all the festivals,
offers Pongal and other sacrifices, and generally worships. Even the royal
family and the Pazhuvettarayars patronize it. Not so for the Thalikulathaar
Temple. In fact, not many people even come there—”
“Ah, but you offer it flowers everyday, don't you? Surely you're
compensated in some form, for your service?”
“My family received a grant for the purpose—it was offered to my
grandfather, during the reign of Emperor Kandaradithyar. These days, I and
my mother serve the temple.”
“Is the Thalikulathaar Temple built of brick? Or stone?” asked
Vandhiyathevan. All along the way, he had seen many formerly brick
temples freshly renovated with stone, and this divine work had prompted
his query.
“Brick of course, but I've heard that they're going to rebuild it with stone,
At least, they say that Pazhaiyarai city's Periya Piratti wishes to begin work

right away, but—” and the youngster hesitated.
“But—what?”
“What's the use of discussing rumours? I've heard it said that one must look
around before speaking in daylight, and not even that, at night. Besides,
we're surrounded by people, in the midst of a city—”
“I would've thought this the best place to discuss secrets. With all the noise
and hubbub, no one's likely to hear a thing.”
“Oh?” The youngster glanced at Vandhiyathevan, suddenly uncertain.
“What secrets are we supposed to discuss?”
Well, here's an intelligent young man, mused Vandhiyathevan. This one
might prove useful to ferret out information. All the more important that I
don't arouse the worst suspicions in him. Aloud, he spoke in a reassuring
voice. “What, indeed? Nothing at all. Be that as it may—thambi, I've
travelled far today and desperately need a place to rest for the night. Would
you help me please, by suggesting a good inn?”
“Thanjai doesn't lack for accommodation, Ayya. There are a good many
inns about, not to mention royal lodgings for foreign visitors. But if you
wish—”
“What's your name, thambi?” asked Vandhiyathevan abruptly.
“Amudhan; Sendhan Amudhan.”
“What a beautiful name! As sweet as nectar, to be sure. But you were about
to invite me to stay at your own home, weren't you?”
“Yes—but how did you guess?”
“I'm a magician, thambi; I've quite a few tricks up my sleeve. Where do you
live?”
“Our garden is a shout away from the city; we live in a house within.”
“That does it—I'm spending the night at your home. I couldn't get a wink of
sleep in this noise and commotion, anyway. In any case, I also wish to make
the acquaintance of a gracious lady—your mother.”
“She's certainly gracious—but also, unfortunate.”
“Why do you say so? Perhaps your father—”

“My father is no more, it's true—but her misfortune dates from her birth.
You'll understand when you see her. Come, now.”
Half a naazhigai beyond the city limits, and they arrived at a beautifully
tended garden. The heady scent of night-flowers delighted
Vandhiyathevan's senses, providing unexpected comfort and a sense of
well-being. The tumult and roar of the city had receded significantly, and
the garden was shrouded in comparative silence. In the middle, stood a tiled
cottage. Two thatched huts flanked it; occupied by families that assisted
Amudhan in tending the garden. The young man tasked a member of one to
stable Vandhiyathevan's horse and feed it.
They entered the house—and as soon as Vandhiyathevan set eyes on
Amudhan's mother, he realized the true extent of her misfortune: the lady
was deaf and mute. What she lacked in these senses though, she more than
made up for in other ways: her face fairly brimmed with compassion and
gentleness; her eyes gleamed with the light of intelligence. And is it not one
of nature's quirks that those who lack a faculty are often blessed more, in
others?
At Amudhan's sign, she understood that their visitor had arrived from
foreign parts, and her smiling face revealed her welcoming, hospitable
spirit.
In a few moments, a dining leaf was duly set on the floor, for the night
meal. The first to arrive, as befitting royalty, were fluffy white idiyappams
and coconut-milk; Vandhiyathevan had never, in his life, tasted anything so
delightfully light and sweet. He demolished ten or twelve of them and half a
measure of the milk in short order. Next to make an appearance was thick,
savoury tamarind stew and corn-flour cakes; Vandhiyathevan did very well
by them as well. Still, his appetite seemed unsated—it took a quarter
measure of rice and half a measure of creamy curd, to staunch the fire in his
belly. Then, and only then did he finally rise from his leaf.
He did make good use of the time his meal afforded him, talking to
Amudhan. In particular, he was keen on learning of those who dwelt within
the Thanjai fort at the moment, aside from Sundara Chozha and his retinue.
The Pazhuvettarayar brothers resided within the fort in their various
palaces, not to mention their own retinue. The Royal Treasury and

Granaries were both situated within as well, which meant that an assorted
number of officials and accountants connected to these departments lived in
Thanjai. In addition, the Chozha Minister Anirudha Brahmaraayar, who
also happened to be the Emperor's confidante, had made his home within
the fort, as well as the Thirumandhira Olai Nayakar, the Royal Scribe. In
addition, there were all the guards and soldiers under the command of
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, whose warrior duties made it imperative that they
and their families reside within the fort. Silver and goldsmiths, precious
metal and gemstone merchants had been given places there as well.
Hundreds of clerks belonging to Periya Pazhuvettarayar's tax department
lived there. The Durgai Temple was situated in a corner of the fort; this
meant that priests, other menials belonging to the temple and courtesans
resided in its vicinity.
“And the ministers?” asked Vandhiyathevan, once he had divined all the
above information. “Are they all within the fort, as well?”
“No, how can that be? They come and go as and when duty demands.
Anirudha Brahmaraayar, for example, hasn't been in the city for quite some
time. They say he has journeyed to the Chera country. Periya
Pazhuvettarayar left the city four days ago, as well—possibly north of the
Kollidam, to the Mid-Lands.”
“But perhaps he's returned? Or don't you know?”
“I did see the young queen of Pazhuvoor's palanquin arrive at the fortress
gates this evening, with my very eyes. Not Pazhuvettarayar, though.
Perhaps he stayed somewhere along the way. He might return tomorrow.”
“Thambi—Prince Madhuranthakar resides within the fort too, doesn't he?”
“Of course. Next to Pazhuvettarayar's palace, to tell the truth. He's married
to Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's daughter, isn't he?”
“Indeed? But this is news to me!”
“Not many people know of it. The Emperor's health being what it is, it was
decided that wedding celebrations were unwarranted.”
“Excellent. In other words, Prince Madhuranthakar is within the fort?”
“He must be. I'm not sure, however, as no one is familiar with his
whereabouts; he doesn't venture out, much. Word is that he spends much of

his time in worship, meditating upon Siva Peruman, and other attendant
concerns.”
“And yet, he's married at such a late date.”
“Surprising, but true. And they say that he's changed a great deal, after his
wedding! But these are royal affairs—far better that we don't discuss such
things.”
The urge to pick Amudhan's brain and learn more was almost
overpowering, but Vandhiyathevan managed to tamp it down. There was no
point in asking endless questions about royals and arousing his worst
suspicions. After all, one never knew—this naïve youngster might prove to
be of immense value, some day. And this charming little cottage so near the
city was a great convenience, as well. Why ruin such excellent
arrangements?
Conspiracies and intrigues aside, the day's hard travel and the previous
night's adventures had taken their toll; Vandhiyathevan felt drowsiness
creep up upon him. Amudhan noticed that his newfound friend was
practically falling asleep where he sat, and swiftly laid out a bed for him.
Even as Vandhiyathevan dropped off to sleep, it was the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya
Rani's radiant face that he saw. Ah, such an exquisite beauty—a dazzling
form and face! He remembered the paralysis that had stolen over him, at the
sudden sight of the vision of beauty bursting upon him. Recalling the
evening's incident awoke a vague, long-lost memory.
He had been walking along a forest path once, in his childhood, when he
had encountered a hissing cobra. Ah, the slender beauty of its form—the
sinuous grace of its movements! Vandhiyathevan had not been able to take
his eyes off the beautiful creature, not even to blink. The snake wove about,
dancing gracefully; his own body mimicked its actions. It is impossible to
guess what might have happened next—but a mongoose leapt up from
nowhere and sprang upon the cobra. The two began a furious battle to the
death. Vandhiyathevan came out of his trance suddenly, and took to his
heels.
Chee, what a terrible comparison! How could he ever compare that
exquisite beauty with a terrible cobra, in a forest? Why, one look at her fair
countenance, radiating innocence, and you could forget hunger, thirst and

every other bodily instinct! Well, he was about to meet her again, tomorrow,
wasn't he? Ah, her voice—silky and smooth all at once—he had never
heard anything quite like it. But that majestic young woman he had come
across on the banks of the Arisilaaru and the Kudandhai astrologer's home
—she had been exquisitely lovely as well, not to mention the unearthly
beauty in her glowing face! Both were beautiful women, but ah, how
different were their features?
Even as he lay dreaming about these two women, a third intruded upon his
ruminations, fury radiating in every step. Nithra Devi, that ferocious
goddess who exerted complete and merciless control over the realm of
sleep, overwhelmed him swiftly.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 24

Crows and Nightingales
Vandhiyathevan slept like a log all night and woke the next day, well after
sunrise. Even at that advanced hour, he lay on his bed, feeling too lazy to
stir. The west winds blew briskly around the cottage; leaves and branches
on trees rustled against one another, with a low murmur that sounded
remarkably like rain. As if in tune to nature's music came a sweet voice,
singing one of saint Sundaramurthy's Thevaram hymns, set to a lilting
melody:
“Ponnaar meniyane pulith
Tholai araikasaithu
Minnaar senjadai mel—milir
Konrai anindhavane!”
At this praise to the “golden hued one, who wears a tiger's skin at his waist,
and the lustrous golden konrai flowers atop his tresses,” Vandhiyathevan
deigned to open his eyes. Sturdy konrai trees met his sight outside the
cottage, with golden yellow blooms hanging off them in long strands.
Sendhan Amudhan stood beneath them, a basket in hand and a hook in
another, singing hymns as he plucked them, one by one. The young man
had obviously bathed very early that morning and now, liberally coated in
vibuthi, looked the very incarnation of Markandeyan. A pity indeed that his
mother was fated to never know what a beautiful voice her son possessed!
Vandhiyathevan rose with the thought, and felt a strange yearning for the
peace and simplicity of a life spent gathering flowers and offering it to
deities in temples. Why couldn't he do the same? What was the point in
wandering around with a sword and spear, looking for someone or
something to hunt? Or be hunted, in his turn?

In a little while, though, his mind underwent a change: not everyone was a
model citizen like Sendhan Amudhan; thieves, murderers, bullies and
cheats abounded, in this world. And one needed a government to put them
in their place. Kings and ministers to form such a government; Velakkara
Regiments to ensure their safety—and men such as himself, if only to go
about carrying messages in palm-leaves. Ah yes—he would certainly have
to seek an audience with Chakravarthy Sundara Chozha today; should he
postpone it to later, Periya Pazhuvettarayar would soon return and then he
may as well give up any chance of entering the palace …
Vandhiyathevan bathed in the lotus pond near the garden, returned to the
cottage and dressed himself in his best clothes and ornaments. To be sure—
he was going to see the Emperor himself, wasn't he? If this was not the best
opportunity to array himself in fine garments, he didn't quite knew what
else was. At least, that was the principal reason. If he had another motive to
look his best—such as, meeting the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani, later that day—
that was something he kept to himself.
Once the morning meal was done, Sendhan Amudhan made preparations to
depart for the afternoon's worship with his baskets of flowers, and
Vandhiyathevan, ready for his royal visit. Both started on foot.
Vallavarayan had made a decision to leave his horse in the cottage. There
was no point in risking a riot, should he bring it into the fort. Besides, his
steed needed the rest; he might have need of it very soon—who knew? It
was best that it stayed here.
He engaged in some light-hearted banter with Amudhan on their way to the
fort, and gleaned a little more information.
“Any relations, besides your mother?” he asked.
“Yes—my mother's elder sister, and brother. Her sister is no more, but her
brother lives in Kodikkarai, and delivers flowers to the Kuzhagar Temple.
And he tends to the lighthouse as well. He has a son and daughter. She—”
he began, and paused.
“What of her?”
“Nothing at all. You see, nature has seen fit to bless our family with strange
quirks. Some of us are mute, but others possess beautiful voices. They sing
extraordinarily well, too …”

“Your cousin isn't mute, is she?” put in Vandhiyathevan.
“Good heavens, no.”
“In other words, she sings very well. Better than you, perhaps?”
“Why, what a question—you might as well ask if a nightingale's voice is
sweeter than a crow's! When Poonguzhali begins to sing, the very king of
oceans bids his waves fall silent, to listen to her song. Cows, goats and even
animals of the forest stay still, spellbound—”
“She's called Poonguzhali, then? The very essence of a flower's fragrance!
A beautiful name.”
“That's not the only thing that's beautiful.”
“She must be, as well—or you wouldn't go into such ecstasies, would you?”
“Deer and peacocks are supposed to be the very image of beauty—but even
they can't hope to rival her beauty; no, not even if they beg and plead for it!
And as for Rathi and Indrani, those celestial women will have to do
penance for several lifetimes in a vain bid to match her loveliness—”
Sendhan Amudhan's heart was not completely lost at Siva Peruman's divine
feet, Vandhiyathevan noticed.
“The perfect bride for you, in fact!” he enthused. “And as she's your
muraippenn, your cousinly claims possess even more merit—so, when's the
wedding?”
“I would never dare to call her my equal. It is I who am not in any way
worthy of her. If they ever held swayamvarams for Poonguzhali like in the
earlier days, I'm sure kings from all fifty-six kingdoms would fall over
themselves, in a vain bid for her hand! Even the Devas might come down
from their celestial abode, perhaps, like they did for Princess Damayanthi.
But then, this is the Kali Yugam, so such things mightn't happen—”
“Well! It almost looks like you wouldn't want to marry her even if she
does.”
“Now that would be too much. If Siva Peruman were to appear before me
this instant and ask, Do you wish to ascend to Holy Kailasam with your
human body intact, like Sundaramurthy Nayanar—or wed Poonguzhali and

live on earth? I would certainly wish the latter. But—what's the purpose in
just my yearning for it?”
“Why ever not? You wish it—and isn't that more than enough for a
wedding? How many, do you think, actually ask for the girl's consent? Take
Pazhuvettarayar, for instance, who's married at the advanced age of sixtyfive—do you think he made a petition for and received the assent of that
young queen, before making her his wife?”
“Anna—these are royal affairs. Why must we discuss them at all? If you
wouldn't take offense, I should like to warn you: you're about to enter the
fort; it would best if you didn't speak of the Pazhuvettarayars. That's just
asking for danger—”
“You quite terrify me, thambi.”
“I'm merely stating the truth. It's the Pazhuvettarayar brothers who rule the
Chozha Empire right now. There's nothing and no one to gainsay them.”
“What—not even the Emperor?”
“Who is ill and abed. If the Pazhuvettarayars drew a line all around him, he
wouldn't even dare step across it, they say. He never utters a word against
them, nor countermands their commands. Why, he doesn't even listen to his
own sons!”
“Indeed. They must be extraordinarily influential, then. Surely they didn't
command quite so much power, even two years ago?”
“No—all this has come about only after the Emperor took up residence in
Thanjavur. Now, their authority knows no boundaries; there's no one to
raise a voice against them. It's said that that was why Anirudha
Brahmaraayar departed to Pandiya Nadu—disgusted with their powerplay.”
“Why did the Emperor move from Pazhaiyarai to Thanjavur in the first
place? Do you know?”
“Bits and pieces of news have been floating for a while—I'll tell you what I
know. Three years ago, Veera Pandiya lost his life in battle. Word is that the
Chozha forces wrecked havoc in Pandiya lands, during those times. Such is
war, isn't it? And so, Madurai came under Chozha rule, but there were
certain of the Pandiya king's aides, who swore revenge. They have taken an

oath to destroy their foes—and this is why the Pazhuvettarayars insisted on
bringing the Emperor here. The Thanjavur fort is far more secure, and there
are more warriors to protect his noble self. Also, the physicians say that this
city is far more conducive to His Majesty's health, than Pazhaiyarai.”
“And that's another thing—everyone talks a great deal about Sundara
Chozhar's health, but no one seems to know exactly what ails him.”
“But they do. Both his legs have been struck by paralysis; they are useless,
now.”
“Ah—then, he can't walk on them? At all?”
“No. Neither can he climb up an elephant or ride a horse. He's bed-ridden,
for what it's worth—even travelling by palanquin is very painful, although
it could be attempted, if need be. That's why he never ventures outside the
palace. And of late, there have been rumours that he's—well … not
himself.”
“What a pity!”
“I'm not sure you can even voice such sentiments, Anna—for fear of being
tried for treason by the Pazhuvettarayars.”
Pazhuvettarayar—Pazhuvettarayar! Wherever he went, whatever he did,
they seemed to loom large, taking over everyone and everything. Not to be
borne, that—no matter their great valour; Sundara Chozhar should certainly
never have allowed them such complete and unquestioning authority over
the Treasury, Granaries, the Thanjai fort and indeed, the security of the
entire land. All this power and authority had undoubtedly gone to their
collective heads—would they even dare think of conspiring against him,
else? And now, the tendrils of their treachery were spreading further and
further—how far would they go? What destruction would they wreak? It
was up to him to do what he could to halt its progress. And if he could—
seize an opportunity to warn the Emperor, as well!
Thanjai's imposing fortress gates came into view. Sendhan Amudhan took
leave of his new friend, and went his way towards the Thalikulathaar
Temple.
Vandhiyathevan, in the meantime, approached the fort—with a great many
castles in the air of his own.

Glossary:
Markandeyan: The son of a rishi, Markandeyan was born with a strange
Damocles' Sword over his head: his parents had been given a choice at birth
—they would either beget a hundred stupid sons who might live to 100—or
a single, intelligent son who would only live to 16. His father chose the
second option, with the result that Markandeyan was everything a parent
could wish for: intelligent, loving, and a staunch devotee of Lord Siva.
When he turned 16, however, Yama, the Lord of Death came to claim him
—but Markandeyan won over him by appealing to Lord Siva, and cheated
death and infirmity. He is thus held as an example for anyone who appears
to have defeated old age, and retains youthful good looks.
The Muraippenn Custom: From ancient times, a man's elder sister's
daughter, or even his aunt/uncle's daughter—i.e., his cousin, has been
considered a perfect matrimonial match, in Thamizh Nadu. The girl is
referred to as his muraippenn—literally, one on whom he has a claim. This
custom is the stuff of legends and folklore; stories abound of young men or
heroes who carried off girls in the teeth of opposition, because she
happened to be his muraippenn; sometimes, it also gave way to intense
strife and conflict, between entire generations of families. In the west,
marriage between cousins is considered almost incestuous now, but the
practice is still widespread, and approved by families, in Thamizh Nadu.
There are many who firmly believe that the muraimaaman, or thaimaaman,
the girl's cousin is the only one with the right to wed her; marriage outside
the family was and is severely discouraged. Naturally, this custom was even
more rigidly enforced in earlier centuries, and even Kalki's times. These ties
have loosened, now.
Swayamvaram: An ancient practice among royalty, when princesses were
either so beautiful/intelligent that it was thought mere arranged marriages
would not do; kings and princes were invited from far and wide, and in a
ceremony, the princess in question could choose her husband from among
them.
Anna: Elder Brother.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 25

Inside the Fort
The palm-tree insignia, Vandhiyathevan soon found, was every bit as
powerful as the wonderful magic rings he had had heard about, in the many
fantasy fairy tales of his childhood.
The hour was early that morning, and a great many people were crowded at
the fort's gates, jostling with each other for entrance: milk and curd vendors;
flower, fruit and vegetable sellers, artisans and craftsmen, clerks and
workers; the sentries at the gates felt the full extent of their authority and
made sure everyone else felt it too, as they let them in through a smaller
entrance set within the huge gate.
The instant Vandhiyathevan displayed the insignia, however, they bowed
from their waists, showed him the greatest deference and actually opened
one of the massive gates for him.
Vandhiyathevan entered Thanjavur, thus, in style.
And oh, the incidents that happened, once he set foot in this venerable city!
One wonders about the alignment of planets and stars at that moment, but
what was it that distinguished this, from many others? So many events
followed one upon the other, in such quick succession and with such an
impact that his entrance, eventually, became a turning-point in the very
history of the Chozha empire.
As for our hero—he stood awestruck for a while, after he stepped inside the
fort.
Kanchi, ancient capital city of the Pallava empire, had been subjected to a
great many invasions from foes; its buildings and residences presented a
dilapidated appearance, falling apart with every day and often coated in
mildew. Been beautifully carved and decorated buildings once, were now

practically in ruins. Aditha Karikalar had done his best to renovate a few
upon his arrival, but even they stood out like fresh flowers among battered
ones, and exaggerated the city's desolation.
Now, Thanjaipuri, on the other hand—ah, everything here was new,
gleaming and glittering with the sheen of innovation. Mandapams and other
residences jostled with each other; some glowed white, pristine in their
finish, while still others were of burnt brick—and gleamed like precious
gems set among radiant pearls and dazzling diamonds. Many boasted
luxurious gardens, courtesy the rich, red soil. Trees such as Punnai,
Asokam, Arasu, Thennai, Aal, Jackfruit and Neem spread their branches
about, their emerald leaves changing various tints of green in the sun,
providing a refreshing sight for the eyes, and the mind. Truly, it seemed as
though this was a celestial city, planned and executed by the divine architect
Mayan himself. Such was its beauty and presence that one felt a burst of
happiness even walking through its streets; a strange sense of unexplained,
but entirely pleasurable pride.
The presence of a great many guards at the gates and the numerous
conditions imposed on those who wished to enter had given
Vandhiyathevan the impression, somehow, that he would find a largely
empty city within.
He could not have been more mistaken: the streets well nigh burst with
surging crowds. Horses and horse-drawn chariots rattled along the avenues
in style, while the earth shook with the thundering steps of elephants,
swaying majestically through the thoroughfares like large, black hillocks,
the bells around their necks tinkling in all directions. The shrieks of milk,
curd, flowers, vegetable and fruit vendors almost shattered his ear-drums;
the alatchi bell announced each hour in musical tones, accompanied by
loud perigai drums. Musical instruments sounded from unexpected corners,
mingling with the melodious songs of young women—a festival
atmosphere prevailed everywhere; enthusiasm and delight pervaded every
space.
Now this – this was truly the very epitome of a city! And perhaps this was
how the capital city of an Empire that was rapidly enlarging upon its
territories would look, with spirit and an energy that infected everyone.

The last thing Vandhiyathevan wished to do was display just how new he
was to a city of these dimensions; anyone he asked for directions to the
palace was sure to look him up and down in derision: So you're new, are
you? Why, they might even stigmatize him a country bumpkin! He would
find his own way—surely it could not be very difficult.
Flags and pretty buntings rose upon large mansions wherever he looked,
fluttering gaily in the brisk west wind, fighting madly with the air currents.
Tiger and palm-tree emblems were to be found in profusion among them—
but above them all rose a tiger flag, larger and more impressive than any in
the city. This, Vandhiyathevan guessed, must clearly by the Emperor's, and
began to plot his next course of action, as he walked in its general direction.
Obviously, he must deliver the palm-leaf, but it was equally important that
he pass on Aditha Karikalar's verbal message as well. He could not
accomplish all this without Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's permission—but how
was he to get it? God had graciously allowed him an entry into the fort, but
he couldn't possibly depend on divine grace for everything, could he? No,
he must find some ruse to meet the Emperor himself; what would that be?
The blood of generations of Vaanar dynasty ran hot through his veins —and
it did not lack resourcefulness in the least. Ah, my ever-fertile brain, you
must help me hit upon the perfect stratagem. Come, come; make use of the
creativity you've always drawn on! After all, it isn't just poets and writers
who need such things to get by—men such as I, involved in the thick of
royal affairs require an imaginative brain as well. Well—what ruse have
you come up with?
One of the first things he did, as soon as he stepped within the fort, was to
determine for himself that a certain old warrior lord was, indeed, absent.
“My man – has Pazhuvettarayar returned to the city, do you know?” he
asked one of the guards who stood by the wall.
“Whom do you refer to, thambi? The Younger is in the city.”
“Of course I know that! I'm enquiring about Periya Pazhuvettarayar, who
was lately on a visit to the mid-lands.”
“Was that where he travelled to? That's news to me. I do know that the
young queen's palanquin returned last evening, but the lord of Pazhuvoor
hasn't returned yet. News is that he will, tonight,” confided the guard.

This was good hearing, indeed. All that he needed to do, now, was to seek
an audience with the Emperor somehow, and deliver his palm-leaf to him.
How, how was he to accomplish this?
The next instant, an idea occurred to him. Worry fell away at once; his face
regained its enthusiastic smile; his eyes gleamed with the spirit of mischief.
As it so happened, he did not have to wander endlessly, in search of the
royal palace; all he did was to keep the large Tiger flag in sight and follow
the roads; they led straight to the palace entrance. And what a palace it was,
indeed. Such imposing columns, and the richly decorated pillars that held
aloft the front mandapam – it was doubtful if even Indra, king of the Devas
possessed such an impressive edifice, or the great king Vikramaditya of the
famed Ujjaini! Why, each of the ornamented horses sculpted into the tall
pillars seemed about to pounce on him, so realistic were they!
A great many paths ran through the city, culminating in the courtyard that
led to the palace; each was guarded by two cavalry men, and a sprinkling of
the members of the infantry. A good many passersby, Vandhiyathevan
noticed, did not even approach the guards; a few daring specimens did dare
to walk up—but once they had stared at the palace's entrance and the
fluttering Tiger flag above, retreated their steps. Whenever it seemed like a
large crowd would congregate, soldiers were swift to make a sign and
disperse it. Even those who gathered made sure to never raise their voices,
but conversed in low murmurs, calculated to reach only each other's ears.
Vandhiyathevan, needless to say, hesitated not a whit. Where others
faltered, he walked briskly, with the utmost of confidence, along the palacepath. The instant he reached them though, two horse-guards barred his way,
their steeds almost nuzzling. A cluster of spears clanged towards him, sharp
points glinting in the sun—that of the soldiers on horses, and on foot.
His magical ring, however, had its effect: the instant he displayed it,
soldiers seemed to deflate; their thinly veiled conceit evaporated. Three
guards stared at the ring one, by one. “Very well. Let him pass,” permitted
another. Two spears parted at once; Vandhiyathevan walked by them
briskly.
And yet – what of it? How many more such inspections was he fated to
pass? How much more scrutiny? How on earth was he going to find Chinna

Pazhuvettarayar? Whom was he supposed to ask for directions, and how?
For, there was no doubt that he could not see the Emperor without due
permission from that worthy. And where would they keep an invalid
Emperor in this sprawling, enormous complex, anyway? How was he to
find that out?
Vandhiyathevan sensed a gaggle of men behind him, paused, and turned.
Yes, a group stood by the guards, waiting for approval to enter. They were
dressed extraordinarily well too, in expensive silks, pearl necklaces, large
makara ornaments and kundalams in their ears. Some wore sacred ash on
their foreheads; others had decorated it with sandalwood paste, kungumam
and fragrant javvadhu. Why—they seemed like poets, from the looks of it.
And so they were.
“The court poets have arrived; Let them through, please!” called out one of
the guards—their leader, possibly—and added to another, “Chinna
Pazhuvettarayar may be found in the central mandapam. Escort them there
at once.”
“Respected lords—should you receive any gifts, please take this path on
your way out. If not, do not bother!” teased another, and laughter rang
through them.
The fruit falls into the milk all by itself, as the saying went, mused
Vandhiyathevan, listening to this conversation. All he had to do, to find
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, was just follow this group of poets; there would be
no need to stammer, stutter or wander around, asking for directions in vain.
As to whatever came after that—well, he had brains, hadn't he? His fertile
imagination would show him some way out. Not to mention lady luck as
well.
Vandhiyathevan joined the tail of the departing poets, and went with them.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 26

“Abaayam! Abaayam!”
Vandhiyathevan entered the central, or aasthana mandapam, a little ahead
of the poets. A man sat upon a high throne, majesty and pride limned in
every pore of his body, and it was not difficult for our hero to guess that this
must be Chinna Pazhuvettarayar.
Quite a few people surrounded him, their palms covering their mouths in
the ultimate sign of deference: one stood waiting with palm-leaves of the
day in his hands; yet another was obviously the kanakkaayar, head clerk,
eager to deliver accounts; the heads of security stood by as well, awaiting
instructions. A few menials stood about, ready to perform any service that
may be required, while others were behind his throne, fanning him with a
white saamaram. Yet another waited with a small box of betel-leaves.
Vandhiyathevan, second to none when it came to a proud mien, found
himself setting his consequence a little aside, in the presence of this
warrior-lord. If anything, Pazhuvettarayar the Younger possessed a pride of
bearing that was a notch above even his elder.
The moment he set eyes on our young man, however, his face brightened
noticeably. “Who might you be, thambi? Where do you come from?”
A soldier by birth and breeding, his interest naturally revolved upon war
and battle and, in consequence, strong young men; he was bent on gathering
as many as he could under his command, in his army. Thus, his enthusiasm
at the sight of Vandhiyathevan.
“I come from Kanchipuram, Commander. Prince Aditha Karikalar bade me
deliver this palm-leaf to his father,” said Vallavarayan in his politest voice.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's face darkened at the mention of Kanchi. “What?
What is that you say?” he snapped.

“I've travelled from Kanchipuram with an olai from Aditha Karikalar.”
“Oh? Well, hand it over.” His manner might have been negligent, but the
warrior-lord's voice betrayed his tension.
“Very well,” replied Vallavarayan as he took out the palm-leaf from his
waistband. “But Commander, it's for the Emperor—”
Which comment Chinna Pazhuvettarayar considered not at all, as he took it
eagerly, threw a glance at it and bade the man next to him, to read it.
“Nothing new, here,” he murmured to himself, as the message was read out.
“Commander, my olai …” Vandhiyathevan's voice trailed away.
“What of it? I shall deliver it to the Emperor myself.”
“It isn't—it's just that I was ordered to deliver it into the hands of the
Chakravarthy myself.”
“Ah—so your instructions were to place no trust in me?” Thanjai's
Commander's face was a perfect storm of fury. “Were those your orders,
from Prince Adithar?”
“Not at all. Those were your brother's, however.”
“Wait—what? Where did you meet the Periyavar?”
“I happened to stay a night at the Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar palace—that
was where we met. And it was he who gave me this insignia, as well.”
“Why could you not have told me all this earlier? So, you stayed at
Kadambur? And who else was present?”
“Quite a few lords from Mazha Nadu, the mid-lands and Thirumunaippaadi
—”
“Now wait, just a moment. You may as well give this into the hands of the
Emperor himself—else those blasted court poets will demand an audience
with him and yap away forever. You may tell me the rest when you have
given your message. Now, you—” and Chinna Pazhuvettarayar sought out
one of the soldiers near him. “Escort this youngster to the Chakravarthy.”
Vandhiyathevan followed his guide ever deeper, into the palace.
The magnificent Chozha throne, seat of an Empire that stretched from east
coast to west, surrounded by the rumbling oceans on three sides—had lately

become a sickbed. And it was here that Emperor Paranthaka Sundara
Chozha lay, his frail body leaning against cushions. A good deal of his time
was spent in rest, imbibing copious doses of medicine; much of his royal
duties had been delegated to others—but there were still dignitaries he had
to grant an audience to, and claims upon his time. It was important for the
wellbeing of the Empire that Ministers, Commanders and the Velakkara
Regiment meet with him at least once a day.
The man who had earned the respect of his subjects with his valorous deeds
on numerous battlefields—an asagaaya sooran; who was so famed for his
good looks that he had been named Sundara, and deemed an equal to
Manmadhan, the God of Love himself, by his adoring people—now lay on
a bed, feeble and fragile, as though a stiff wind might break him in half.
Vandhiyathevan stared at the ruler of the Chozha empire, speechless. His
eyes brimmed, overcome by the sight. He approached very softly, and
delivered the olai with the utmost respect.
“Where are you from?” quavered the Chakravarthy, voice faint with fatigue.
“Whose olai is this?”
“Prabhu, I come from Kanchi,” Vandhiyathevan's voice was husky with
emotion. “I bring you this message from Prince Adithar.”
The Emperor's face brightened at once. “Devi,” He turned to his consort,
the Empress Vanavan Maadevi, originally a princess of the Thirukkovilur
Malayaman clan. “Your son has sent us a palm-leaf,” and he began to read
the missive. “Ah. His highness has built a golden palace in Kanchi,” he
said, and his eyes lost their lustre. “He wishes us to come to stay there, for a
while.”
His face grew even more pinched than before, if possible. “Devi, my
grandfather, the illustrious Paranthaka Chakravarthy, gathered every speck
of gold in his palaces and donated them all towards a beautiful roof, for the
great Lord who dances in Thillai—he transformed it into a golden
ambalam. None of our family was ever remotely interested in building
golden palaces for themselves—their fervour lay in raising beautiful
temples for God. And here is Adhithan, committing such a heinous act
against everything sacred! Ah, how are we ever to redeem ourselves?”

The Empress, whose face had gained some colour at the mention of a letter
from her son, fell. She turned away, unable to say a word.
Vandhiyathevan decided that it was time to intervene. “Your Majesty,” he
began, screwing up every bit of courage and swiftness of tongue he
possessed. “Surely your son hasn't committed a grievous sin that fairly
demands redemption? He has, after all, only obeyed the dictates of a loving
son's heart. Parents are always as gods to their children, aren't they? Is it
not, then, a commendable action to have built a temple for his deities to
dwell in?”
A wan smile appeared on Sundara Chozha's face. “I know not who you
might be, thambi, but you seem eminently sensible, and you possess an
intelligent tongue in your head. But tell me this—a son may consider his
parents as gods, but surely they are not so, to the rest of the world? Golden
temples may only be dedicated to the omnipresent, and omniscient supreme
power, worshipped by all, may they not?
“Prabhu—a son may consider his father a god, but so do people, their king.
I have heard tell, and read in our ancient epics and sacred texts that an
Emperor is the very incarnation of Thirumaal, the One who Guards us all. I
should say that in this case, your son's intentions in building you a golden
palace were laudable in the extreme.”
The Emperor threw a glance at his queen, again. “Did you listen to this
intelligent young man, my dear? Ah, if our Adhithan has friends such as
these, then we need not fear for his future, any more. Nor worry about his
tendency to rush where angels fear to tread!”
Then he turned to Vandhiyathevan again. “Thambi—what matters now is
hardly the merit, or otherwise, of building a golden palace. You see how I
am situated, do you not? I can barely move about, and a long journey is
certainly out of the question. We are desperate to see him, but at this
moment, he is the one who will have to visit me. Come tomorrow, and I
shall ensure that you have a reply.”
A confused babble of voices and footsteps reached them at this point, and
Vandhiyathevan realized that the court poets were about to enter the
mandapam. Ah, if those men arrived, chances were that Chinna
Pazhuvettarayar might accompany them—and he might as well bid farewell

to any chance of passing across a message. Now he would just have to seize
the moment and whisper a few words of warning.
Having decided all this within moments, Vandhiyathevan broke into hurried
speech. “Chakravarthy, grant me a favour: kindly do listen to me—you
must leave Thanjavur at once! Great peril surrounds you here—abaayam!
Abaayam —!”
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar had entered the hall even as he spoke the last few
words, the court poets following him. Vandhiyathevan's hasty warning fell
on his ears.
His face bloomed with fury.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 27

The Court Poets
Paraak! Paraak! Here come the court poets—the royals bards—those
eminent men whose knowledge of divine Thamizh is as boundless as the
oceans!—The distinguished descendents of great sage Agasthiyar!—Who
have read the numerous pages of classics such as Tholkaappiyam end to
end!—Who have well-nigh gobbled up epics like Silappathikaaram!—Who
know more about the renowned Thirukkural than its very author!—Who
may prescribe the rules of grammar to literature!—Who will quote classics
until the world ends to experts in grammar!—Who, despite all these
fantastic qualifications, can actually compose verses on their own! The truth
of their talent lies in the fact that millions of termites may subsist for
centuries on their numerous, wonderful and timeless creations!
These superbly talented men now gathered in a group before the
Chakravarthy, and chorused in one voice: “Vaazhga! Long live the Emperor
Who Rules over the Seven Worlds! Long live Sundara Chozha, Who
Brought Pandiyan to his knees! May He who guards and cherishes poets
live long! May the grandson of Panditha Vathsala, the illustrious Emperor
Paranthaka Chozha, royal patron of arts, flourish forever and ever!”
Judging by the expression on Sundara Chozha's face, he was not very happy
with these grandiloquent expressions, but his natural courtesy and breeding
made him attempt to rise and welcome them.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, observing this, stepped forward. “Prabhu, our
court poets' intention in arriving here was not to discommode you in any
way—but rather to seek an audience with your gracious Majesty. I pray that
you lie in repose, and not inconvenience yourself.”
“Indeed yes, Oh King of Kings!” exclaimed Nallan Saathanaar, obviously
the leader of the poetic group. “Never shall it be said that we were the cause

of Your Majesty's agitation!”
“I am very glad to see you, of course, after such a long time,”
acknowledged the Emperor, who cherished a great fondness for Thamizh. “I
should be happy to listen to a few verses, if you will.”
The group sat down on the jewel-toned jamakkaalam, the carpet laid in
front of the throne. Vandhiyathevan decided to seize the chance, and took
his seat among them, as well. His message was not complete, and he did not
really want to leave if he could have another chance at delivering it fully.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar saw him—and his ire rose. It took a great deal of
self-control to push down the fury that threatened to consume him, but he
did it. His first instinct was to send the insolent boy out, but then, wiser
counsel prevailed: he would have more scope to understand the boy's
intentions if he were right here, under his nose, so to speak. Very well, he
would appear to ignore him for a while—but once these dratted poets had
left, he would seize upon him and know exactly what tales he had been
telling the Emperor.
“Danger! Abaayam!” The young man's voice rang in his ears, even now.
***
“My good friends—I have not had the pleasure of your company in a long
while. My ears hunger for the taste of beautiful Thamizh verses,” began
Sundara Chozha. “Have any of you written a new song, perhaps?”
At once, one of the many masters of poetry gathered, sprung up. “Prabhu,
this servant comes to your feet from the Buddhist Palli, the monastery that
carries your illustrious name, in Ulagapuram, and brings you welcome
news: the monks are delighted beyond measure at your magnanimous
grants to them; at the nobility of a Saivite who showers wealth on their
monasteries. They are, however, grieved to know of your ill-health and
have been praying endlessly for your recovery. Your gracious Majesty must
permit me to recite one of their verses.”
“By all means—I am waiting to hear it,” assented the Emperor. The poet
obliged at once, with a simple verse that exulted in the grace and
compassion Sundara Chozha, King of Nandhipuri, and prayed that his
strength, large-heartedness and beauty live long:

“Pothiyan thirunizhal punidha! Nirparavuthum
Methagu Nandhipuri Mannar Sundara
Chozhar vanmaiyum vanappum
thinmaiyum ulagair ciranthu vaazhgenave!”
“Excellent!” The rest of the poets erupted in praise, once the poem ended.
“It is indeed astonishing that Buddhist monks should be capable of such
gratitude,” wondered one particularly staunch Saivite poet.
“True, for the service I rendered the Ulagapuram Buddhist monastery was
meager, in my opinion,” admitted the Emperor.
“Ah, never that, Sire. Who among us, who has experienced Your Majesty's
compassion and bounty can help but sing its praise? Why, even Indra, lord
of the Devas, the Sun God, and Siva Peruman themselves have known that
great felicity!” put forward one worthy.
“But how is this?” An amused smile twisted Sundara Chozha's lips. “Surely
all these divine entities could not have had occasion to find themselves
beholden to me?”
“Your Majesty must permit me to recite this verse,” requested the poet.
“Certainly.”
“Indiran erak kari alithaar –
Pari ezhalithaar
Senthiru menith thinagararku –
Sivanaar manathup
Painthugilerap pallakalithaar –
Pazhaiyaarai nagar
Sundara Chozharai yaavaroppaargal ith
Thonnilathe!”
“Excellent!” “Marvelous!” The court echoed with loud applause, a great
many signs of assent and numerous exclamations of approval at this
extravagant verse.

Sundara Chozha looked at them, eyes bright with emotion. “Could one of
you please elaborate on this song's meaning?”
Many rose at the same time and for a while, a confused babble grew, until
everyone except Nallan Saathanaar took their seats again. The poet then
began to explain:
“Once, Indra, the lord of the celestial Devas was engaged in furious battle
with the demon Vriddhaasuran. So fierce was the combat that the Deva
actually lost his famed and powerful elephant, Airavadham. He searched
high and low for a suitable replacement, but could not seem to find a single
one anywhere, in the whole world. Finally, desperate for a mount, he came
down to Emperor Sundara Chozha of Pazhaiyarai, and petitioned him for an
elephant that was as powerful as his lost mount. To which the gracious
Emperor replied that he was very sorry, but there was none that was the
equal of Indra's elephant. “But I have a great many that are far superior to
it!” and he led the way to his elephant enclosure, where stood thousands of
the magnificent animals like large, dark hillocks. Devendran stared at the
animals at a loss for words, for he knew not which to choose! Sundara
Chozha took pity on the stupefied lord of the Devas, and chose an elephant
himself—but Indra was struck again, by anxiety: How was he ever going to
ride such a mammoth? Not even his famed Vajrayudham, his signature
weapon could control such a mount! And then, Emperor Sundara Chozha
came to his rescue again, and gifted him with a splendid goad as well, to
assist him!
“Yet another time, the Sun God, Surya Bhagavan, who rules the sky with
his dazzling red and gold rays, was bound in fierce combat with the dreaded
snake-king Rahu. The evil demon tried his best to swallow Surya in one
gulp, but the god's brilliant beams almost blinded him, and he couldn't. His
terrible venom, Kaalakodi did, however, kill all seven horses that drove the
Sun God's chariot, and Surya Bhagavan stood bewildered—for how was he
to shower his rays upon the world every day, without his chariot and trusty
steeds? And then, Emperor Sundara Chozha, the very epitome of
compassion approached him with seven of his best stallions and requested
him to nurture the world, with his life-giving light. Surya Bhagavan duly
appreciated this signal service from one who was his own regal descendent.

“And there is the time when Siva Peruman and his divine consort Parvathi
Devi, were to be wedded in their heavenly abode of Kailasam. The bride's
party arrived with everything traditionally given as part of her gift to the
groom—save for one thing: a palanquin. The entire wedding party broke
out in worried speech: soon, a wedding procession would have to take place
—and there was nothing except for the bull, for the newly married couple to
ride in! Sundara Chozha, who learnt of this situation, sent at once for his
pearl-encrusted palanquin from Pazhaiyarai. With great deference and
devotion due to God, he made a present of it, on the occasion of Siva
Peruman's own wedding. Who, I ask you, can possibly be called the equal
of Emperor Sundara Chozha in this world, surrounded by roaring oceans,
for compassion and large-heartedness?”
Sundara Chozha, who had been listening to this involved and colourful
explanation, broke into a merry peal of laughter. Long months of illness and
suffering had lined his wan face; not even his consort, Empress Vanavan
Maadevi had heard utter a chuckle in all this time. Her husband's laughter
served to lift her sagging spirits a little. Even her maids and assistants were
cheered at the sight.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, who had remained standing all this while, now
stepped forward. “I believe I have committed a grievous error,” he said,
bringing his palms together. “Will Your Majesty forgive me?”
“Ah, is that Thanjai's Commander? Now what is this heinous error you beg
my pardon for? Perhaps you snatched the elephant and horses I graciously
donated to both Indra and Surya Bhagavan? Or is it the palanquin that you
looted from poor Siva Peruman's bride treasures? You are capable of such
devious acts, you know.” And the Emperor was consumed by mirth, again.
This time, the court poets joined him—but it was Vandhiyathevan, perhaps,
who seemed to appreciate the joke a little too much, and laughed the most.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar noticed it, and sent a scorching glance in his
direction, before turning to the Emperor again.
“My mistake, Your Majesty, was this: I gave a great deal of credence to the
royal physicians all this while, and kept our poets from visiting you. I
believed their company would be harmful—but I was greatly mistaken.
Their presence amuses you; this court has witnessed your laughter after
aeons, I should think. Even the gracious Empress, Udaya Piratti and her

maids smile at your happiness. And I delighted in it as well. It was an
unforgivable crime, was it not, to have prevented such a pleasurable
exercise all this while?”
“You make an excellent point, Commander—and have proven the truth of
my words as well. I did ask, did I not, to disregard the physicians and allow
the court poets to meet me, instead of barricading me against them?”
The royal physician judged this the right moment to rise, cover his mouth
with his palms in extreme deference and launch into a long and involved
explanation, but the Emperor did not seem very interested in it. Instead, he
turned towards the poets.
“Does anyone here know the creator of such a wonderful verse?” he asked.
“Do tell me, if you do.”
“Ah, now that is what we could never find out,” lamented Nallan
Saathanaar. “Sire, if we ever do, we have resolved to award him the grand
title, the Chakravarthy of Poetry, and carry him around in a decorated
palanquin on our very shoulders. Alas—our efforts have so far, yielded no
result.”
“Not surprising in the least,” was Sundara Chozha's sardonic reply. “Any
poet who can possibly stack so many outrageous lies one upon another in
these silly verses certainly wouldn't be willing to reveal his identity, would
he?”
The poets stared at one another, nonplussed at this remark. Not one of them
could think of a suitable reply.
It was at this moment that our Vandhiyathevan threw himself valiantly into
the breach. “Ah, Prabhu, they're not quite lies. After all, should ordinary
people utter such things, they're classified as rank falsehoods—but the very
same statements, made by royal strategists would be lauded cunning ruses
worthy of Chanakya! As for bards, they would consider it imaginative, and
call it by various beautiful and confounding poetic terms such as ani
alangaaram or il porul uvamai—”
“Excellent!” The court poets turned towards him as one and expressed their
approval in no uncertain terms. “Well said!”

The Emperor stared at Vallavarayan as well. “Ah, you are the young man
who brought me an olai from Kanchi, are you not? Well, well, you certainly
have rendered my arguments futile with your intelligent answer.” Then, he
turned towards the poets. “My learned friends—there is no need to expend a
great deal of your valuable time in trying to find this elusive poet, and
confer upon him the title Chakravarthy of Poetry—for he bears, already, the
crushing weight of the Chozha crown upon his head, and struggles to live
with titles such as Emperor of Three Worlds, or even worse, Seven Worlds,
King of Kings, and other such grandiose appellations. I am not sure he could
survive one more!”
And if I were to tell you, dear readers, that the poets who listened to this
unexpected claim almost drowned in a sea of amazement—well, you will
simply have to believe it. After all, it could be my imaginative and creative
turn of phrase, and an example of various beautiful poetic terms such as il
porul uvamai, or ani alankaram, could it not?
Glossary:
Kalki's Notes: In years bygone, before this story took place, the Chozha
lands were once under Pallava rule, and Pazhaiyarai was known by the
name Nandhipuri. This explains why Sundara Chozha was sometimes
referred to as the King of Nandhipuri.
Udaya Piratti: It was the custom, sometimes, to refer to the Emperor's royal
consort by this term.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 28

An Iron Grip
Once the wave of amazement washing over everyone like an unexpected
flashflood subsided a little, Nallan Saathanaar spoke up, a good deal of
hesitation in his voice. “Then, the poet who composed the song, Prabhu,
was it —?”
“ –the Emperor of Three Worlds who lies before you this very moment,
unable to even move his legs,” supplied Sundara Chozha.
“Ah!” A clamour of exclamations and sounds of surprise rose among the
bards. Some shook their heads and bodies in various strange contortions,
uncertain of how to express themselves; others sat still, unaware of their
own feelings.
“Honoured bards,” Sundara Chozhar himself, continued his tale. “Once,
poets and learned men of words were gracious enough to visit me in
Pazhaiyarai—perhaps some of you were there as well. Each sang in praise
of the greatness of my ancestors and the Chozha dynasty. They sang about
me, too, heaping praises that I gave away such-and-such a thing, or
showered riches on someone else. Young princess Kundhavai was by my
side, then, and when the poets left with their rewards, she expressed her
enormous admiration for their wonderful songs. I argued that I was a great
deal more talented than them, and could sing just as well. That was when I
composed this little verse on the spur of the moment—and then I petitioned
her gracious Highness for a reward. My little girl climbed on my back, said
“Here's your prize!” and delivered two smart slaps on my cheeks! Ah, I
remember it as though it happened just yesterday. And yet, it has been more
than eight years …”
“Wonderful!”—“Astonishing indeed!” Exclamations of amazement and
delight burst forth, from the assembled poets.

Kundhavai!—the very word sent a thrill of exhilaration through
Vandhiyathevan's veins. Many were the tales he had heard of this young
princess's beauty, refinement and intelligence. And here, in front of him was
the fortunate man who had fathered her; the elderly woman by him was her
mother. Ah, the pride in the Emperor's voice as he spoke of his beloved
daughter—how his voice shook at the very mention of her name!
Vandhiyathevan's right hand moved of its own volition towards the band of
silk around his waist and felt around it; within, was the precious olai he was
supposed to deliver to Kundhavai. And then his fingers stopped, paralyzed.
His heart stuttered with shock. Ayyo—the olai—the olai is missing! Where
could it be? Could it have fallen somewhere? Perhaps it slipped out when I
handed over the palm-leaf meant for the Emperor? But where, then?
Perhaps it fell in the aasthana mandapam? What if Chinna Pazhuvettarayar
got his wretched horrible hands on it? Ah, the peril of it falling into his
clutches—what a terrible misfortune!—how was he to get out of this one—?
Now that he knew that the olai meant for her had slipped and fallen away
somewhere, the court and its poets were the last thing on Vandhiyathevan's
mind. He could barely sit still; none of the conversations around him really
made any sense to him. Not that he cared, anyway.
Meanwhile, Sundara Chozha had gone ahead with his recital, to the
admiring bards: “I suspect that Kundhavai regaled someone with this silly
verse of mine—probably Eesanya Bhattacharyar from Pazhaiyarai's
Thirumetrali Temple. And he, perhaps, spread it all around for a laugh at
my expense —!”
“Prabhu, even if you were, indeed, the author of this song—what of it? It is
truly a wonderful little verse. In addition to being the Emperor of this
world, you are now the Chakravarthy of Poetry as well!” commented
Nallan Saathanaar.
“And yet, were I to compose this verse now, I would not stop at just giving
away elephants to Indra, horses to Surya, or palanquins to Siva Peruman.
Remember the tale of Markandeyan who appealed to the great lord to save
his life from Yama? Well, Siva Peruman duly obliged and kicked away the
god of death, but his pitiful mount, the bull, expired from the ire of the
deity. And Pazhaiyarai's Sundara Chozha, who heard of Yama's terrible
plight, wandering around without his steed, duly donated one to him! And

now, the god of death travels upon his mount majestically, seeking me. Not
even Thanjai's Commander, Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, can stop him and his
precious bull, can he?”
Even as the words fell from the Emperor's lips, tears began to flow down
the sallow cheeks of Udaya Piratti. Some of the poets gathered began to sob
themselves, unable to bear the sorrow.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, it seemed, was the only one to maintain some
semblance of courage. “Prabhu—I am prepared to battle even Yama, in the
course of my service to you!” he announced.
“I entertain no doubts on that score, Commander. I do know, however, that
no man is capable of winning over the god of death. All we can do is pray
that we have the strength to face death without fear. After all, didn't one of
Thamizh's greatest poets sing, “I do not fear Death?”
A poet rose at once, and began to recite the famous verse of Appar's, that
sang of his willingness to face extreme torture and even death, fearlessly, in
the face of persecution against his faith:
“Naamaarkkum kudiyallom,
Namanai anjom
Naragathil idarppadom
Nadalaiyallom
Emappom, piniyariyom—”
The Emperor interrupted, at this point. “Ah, such devotion, such complete
faith! Saint Appar suffered terribly from the dreaded soolai disease—but
gods grace cured him completely of his stomach ailment. No wonder he
sings so exultantly, that he fears illness no longer. My friends, far better that
you sing of such beautiful verses extolling god, rather than in praise of
pitiful creatures such as I. Great men of god such as Appar, Sundarar and
Sambandar have sung numerous songs in chaste Thamizh—how wonderful
it might be, to collect them all together? Why, a lifetime would not suffice
to learn and sing them all!”
“If it pleases you, King of Kings, we shall be honoured to begin this sacred
task at once.”

“No—I am afraid that such an enormous undertaking could hardly be
accomplished in my time. Later, however …” and the Emperor's voice
trailed away, as he lapsed deep into thought.
The royal physician tiptoed up to Chinna Pazhuvettarayar and murmured
something into his ears. Sundara Chozha, who glanced at the whispering
duo, stared at his audience, eyes wide and puzzled, as though he had come
out of a trance. He seemed, at that moment, a gaunt, pitiful creature,
snatched just that instant from the gaping maws of death.
“Sire, you did desire to listen to a song from the Sangam era. These learned
men may leave once they have recited one, may they not?” queried the
Commander.
“Ah yes, of course I did,” sighed the Emperor. “It seems to me that my
mind is losing its battle with awareness, along with my body. Please—do
continue.”
At a sign from Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, Nallan Saathanaar of the poets
stood up. “Oh King of Kings, chief among your ancestors, perhaps the most
famous of them all, was the Emperor Karikal Peruvalathaar, who hoisted
the Tiger flag on the very summit of the Himalayas. The beautiful city of
Poompuhar was the capital of the Chozha Empire, during his prosperous
reign. Ships would dock at that sea-port with so many goods and produce
that it was an onerous task to keep count. Here is a song by a poet
belonging to the Sangam era, and to those glorious times, who describes the
goods that reached Poompuhar, from various countries:
“Vadamalai pirantha maniyum ponnum,
Kudamalai pirantha vaaramum akilum
Thenkadal muthum, kunakadal thukirum
Gangai vaariyum Kaavirip payanum
Eezhathu unavum kaazhagath thaakkamum—”
[Gold and precious gems from the mountainous lands of the North;
Sandalwood, akil and other fragrant incenses from the hills of Podhigai;
pearls and corals from the southern seas; produce from the banks of rivers
such as the Ganga and Kaveri; food-grains from Eezham and goods from
far-flung places such as Kadaaram …]

Sundara Chozha signed the poet to stop, at this point. “During the glorious
times of Karikalar, it was Chozha Nadu that received food and grains from
Eezham—you allowed these poets in to impress that upon me, didn't you,
Commander?”
“Yes, Sire,” came the voice of Chinna Pazhuvettarayar—admittedly, in a
markedly feeble tone.
“You have made your point. Reward these bards, please, and send them on
their way.”
Thanjai's Commander turned towards them and delivered the royal
dismissal, upon which they left, chanting praises. “Vaazhi!”
Already listless and rather panicked at the sudden disappearance of the olai
meant for Kundhavai, Vandhiyathevan decided that he would make his
escape as well, and sidled along them, hoping to slip into the middle of the
crowd.
He was doomed to disappointment, however. As he neared the entrance, a
strong hand crept out and clutched his wrist in an iron grip.
Now, Vandhiyathevan was a courageous young man, in the normal way—
but that grip shook him, right from the top of his head to the tips of his toes,
and paralyzed him into standing still.
He looked up—and saw that the hand belonged to none other than Chinna
Pazhuvettarayar himself.
The court poets streamed out of the aasthana mandapam.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 29

“Our honoured guest …”
The poets' departure was the sign for the royal physician to approach the
Emperor with some kind of a medicinal concoction. Vanavan Maadevi,
princess of the Malayaman clan, received it from him gently, and proffered
it to her husband.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, who had kept his patience somehow, until this
time, now hastened to his side, dragging Vandhiyathevan by the hand.
“Prabhu? Has the new medicine had any effect?”
“The physician certainly swears by it; so does Her Majesty. I, however,
must admit that I feel nothing of the sort. To confess the truth, Commander
—all this is a pitiful waste of time and energy. My days are numbered;
Yama nips at my heels. At this very moment, I know he seeks me in
Pazhaiyarai, and once he realizes that I no longer reside there, he will knock
at my doors here—”
“You must not speak so, Prabhu—witness, if you please, how your words
sink our spirits! Your ancestors—”
“Ah, you remind me, of course, that none of my ancestors feared Death. But
if I were to have the good fortune of embracing a valiant death in a
battlefield, like my forebears, Commander, neither would I; nor would I
bemoan my fate. I would, in fact, welcome it with open arms and an
enthusiastic heart. My uncle Rajadithyar embraced death as he rode his
elephant into war, in Thakkolam; he carved his name into the annals of
Chozha history and gained pride of place for eternity as He Who Embraced
Death on his Elephant. As for me—I shall gain the noble title of Sundara
Chozha Who Feebly Welcomed Yama on his Sickbed, I suppose. Yet
another uncle of mine, Emperor Kandaradithyar, was solely immersed in
worship of Siva Peruman; death held no fears for him. He went on

pilgrimages to lands beyond the western seas, and attained the lord's feet
there, earning the sobriquet. He Who Embraced Death in the West. I claim
no special devotion towards god; neither am I in any position to make
pilgrimages. How many more days am I fated to lie abed, a sore trial to both
myself and those around me? And yet, something tells me—I am not long,
for this world—”
“Sire, the royal physician is confident that your health is in no danger; the
astrologers are of the same opinion. And yet, this young man spoke of
danger a while ago, did he not?”
“Ah, the youngster from Kanchi? Yes—I do remember him saying
something about peril. What were you speaking of, thambi? My state of
health, perhaps?”
Vallavarayan stared at the Emperor, brain racing at the speed of lightning.
Were he to admit that he did, indeed, warn the Chakravarthy of danger, he
was done for; every worst suspicion would be aroused, and he would be the
one courting peril in every form. Very well: now, if any, was the time for
him to put his creativity to good use. He would have to play around with
words and sounds, change Thamizh grammar itself, from nedil into kuril,
and hope that he could pull this particular ruse off.
“Your Gracious Majesty—who am I to speak of danger, in your exalted
presence? Our valiant Chinna Pazhuvettarayar guards this formidable fort;
the royal physicians are always at hand and here is our empress, caring for
your noble person, the very incarnation of Savithri Amman, willing to bring
back her husband from the doors of death. What sort of danger could
possibly dare to accost you, here? No—all I cried out, Your Majesty, was
Abayam! Abayam!—I simply wished to submit a prayer at your illustrious
feet; to beg your indulgence, your compassion. Grant me sanctuary,
gracious Highness. I am but a stranger here—the last of our once hoary
Vaanar clan; its only representative. Thus far, I have served under your son
and gladdened his heart. Now, I petition you, Sire, to consider my request
and grant me at least a fraction of the lands my ancestors once ruled over.
Oh King of Kings, all I can do is prostrate myself at your feet—and pray
that a boon be granted to this ignorant servant. Abayam, Your Majesty, this
orphan begs your protection!” And Vandhiyathevan stopped to take a
breath, after his nonstop speech.

Judging by Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's pinched expression, he was far from
happy with this effusion. The Emperor's face, however, which had been
looked haggard and drawn, now relaxed into a smile. The Queen's face
showed its pleasure, as well.
“It would seem that Goddess Saraswathi showered this young man with Her
divine Grace, and wrote on his tongue the very day of his birth,” marveled
the Empress. “He has a way with words, hasn't he?”
Well, he had come this far—no harm in seizing the day, was there?
Vandhiyathevan decided that he would make the best of the situation. “Your
Gracious Majesty—I appeal to you, my lady, to address my wants and
further my cause, with the Emperor. I am an orphan, you see, a man with no
relations—I shall have to swallow my pride and speak for myself. I have
heard tales from our epics that Goddess Parvathi appealed to her lord, Siva
Peruman, and the Goddess Lakshmi to her consort, Thirumaal, on behalf of
their devotees. I plead with her Majesty to speak for me—please grant me
at least ten villages of my ancestor's lands, and I shall consider myself
fortunate beyond belief!”
Sundara Chozha could not help but feel delighted and impressed at his wellmannered, submissive speech. “I find myself liking this young man a great
deal, Commander,” he addressed Chinna Pazhuvettarayar. “As for Devi—I
believe she is considering adopting him as a third son, perhaps! About his
request—we may grant it, I suppose? There should be no impediment,
should there?”
“I do not quite see where my opinion ever enters this issue, Sire. Surely it is
Prince Aditha Karikalar whose consent or otherwise is required, at this
juncture?”
“Sire, I've petitioned the Crown Prince, but he bids me ask the Pazhuvoor
Lords. Now that I'm here, Thanjai's Commander wishes me to submit
myself to the Prince. And here I am, caught in the middle—”
“Never fear, child. We shall find an opportunity to hear them both out,”
promised the Emperor. Then, he turned to Chinna Pazhuvettarayar. “This
youngster, I am sure you are aware, brought me an olai from the Prince.
Nothing new, I am afraid—just a message, informing me that he is

constructing a gold palace. Apparently, he would like it if I resided there,
for a while.”
“It shall be as you please, Sire,” came the Commander's answer.
“Ah, you shall carry out everything as I please, of course. But my legs—my
ridiculously weak legs refuse to accede to my wishes the same way.
Journeying to Kanchi at this time is impossible—and I simply cannot even
conceive of travelling in closed palanquins, like women. The very thought
is disgusting. All I can do is send a reply to Adhithan, bidding him to come
to Kanchi—”
“Surely the Prince is required to stay on in Kanchi, for the time being? Our
foes in the north are still powerful, aren't they?”
“Parthibendran and Malayaman are more than capable of taking care of
them. I do not quite know why, but something deep within whispers to me
that the Prince must be by my side, now. And that is not all—I wish to send
a message to Eezham as well, asking my young prince to return home, as
well. I need them both with me, to discuss something very important.
Besides, you will get an opportunity to communicate your objections to
sending food to Ilankai, while Arulmozhi is here—”
“Forgive me, Sire, but as far as sending food grains to Eezham is
concerned, mine is not the objection. Rather, it is the people of Chozha
Nadu who are displeased at such a drain on our resources. The last harvest
yielded disappointing results, Sire, and there was barely enough for our own
people. When such is the circumstance, sending ship after ship of rice to
Eezham seems to our people to be a colossal waste. At the moment, they
are careful to keep their objections to a low murmur—but soon, their voices
will rise to a shout. Why, they might even penetrate the walls of your palace
and resound in your ears —!”
“Never would Arulmozhi embark upon something that his people object to
strenuously. In any case, it would be better if he does visit us, once. We
must decide on sending a messenger, once Periya Pazhuvettarayar returns to
us. Do you know when that is likely to be?”
“Tonight, certainly, Sire.”
“Then I shall send a reply to Kanchi tomorrow. This young man may carry
it, may he not?”

“Someone else would be suited to do it, I think. This youngster has
travelled from Kanchi in one breath—perhaps it would be better if he rested
himself for a while.”
“Excellent. Why, he could even remain here until the Prince comes to us.”
The Empress chose to rise, at this moment. “Forgive me, Sire,” apologized
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar at once. “I have stayed talking far too long, today
—and have forced Her Majesty to issue me a warning.”
“This young man is our guest, Commander. Please do ensure that his every
need is taken care of,” instructed Vanavan Maadevi. “Ah, had the Emperor
enjoyed good health, he might have stayed in this very palace!”
“Rest assured that I shall take care of him, Your Majesty,” promised Chinna
Pazhuvettarayar. “I shall take great care of him, indeed.”
His hand rose almost without his knowledge, touched his impressive
moustache—and twirled it.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 30

The Chithira Mandapam
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar made sure to drag Vandhiyathevan along with him,
when he left for the aasthana mandapam. That young man's breathless
explanation about danger had not really satisfied him. Had it perhaps been a
mistake, he wondered, to send the boy off for a private audience with the
Emperor? But what choice had he had? As Aditha Karikalan's man, he
deserved every ounce of suspicion thrust upon him—but as someone who
carried his brother's message, it was impossible to doubt him. Ah, but could
anyone even presume to dictate caution to his elder brother, who knew
everything there was to know about such things?
And yet—the Commander thought back to the moment he had strode into
the Chakravarthy's audience chamber, and seen the boy hesitate in front of
the Emperor, looking rather nervous, his eyes almost falling out of his head.
“Abaayam! Abaayam!” his voice seemed to ring out quite clearly. If he had
indeed been talking about “Abayam,” surely, he could not have heard the
word “Abaayam,” in its place?
In any case, it would be better to keep the youngster with him for a few
days, and make enquiries to his brother. A warrior such as this one would
do very well for his personal entourage, to tell the truth—he would be of
great use. And why not procure a part of his lost ancestral lands as well,
while he was at it? Lads like these, once they were the recipients of such
magnificent gestures, prostrated themselves at your feet for eternity. And if,
by some chance, he was confirmed as the enemy, then steps could be taken
to address such an eventuality as well.
Whatever the outcome, I would do well to wait until my brother returns, he
mused. And then—we shall see.

The moment they reached the aasthana mandapam, Vandhiyathevan began
to look about him eagerly. He stared hard at the ground where he had
handed over the olai to the Commander, wondering if, perhaps, there was
another, equally important palm-leaf, somewhere. Ah, if it was gone—then
the world possessed no greater fool than him! Lost, forever, would be the
opportunity to meet the Chozha dynasty's most beautiful, world-renowned
princess—and he would have failed in carrying out one half of Aditha
Karikalar's commission.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar looked about, and narrowed on one of the men
standing guard. “You—escort this young man to our palace. Find some
room for him in our guest quarters and make sure his every need is taken
care of. And stay there until I return.”
The moment Vandhiyathevan departed with his escort, another soldier
approached the Commander, deference limning every pore of his body, and
handed a palm-leaf. “This olai was found on the floor, on the way to the
Emperor's audience chamber,” he murmured. “Perhaps it fell from the waist
of the young man who just left?”
The Commander took it eagerly, opened the olai and ran his eyes through
the contents. His brows rose in a threatening frown to almost half his
forehead—and a terrifying expression flitted through his rather harsh
countenance.
“Ah, an olai to the Ilaiya Piratti from her devoted brother Aditha Karikalan:
Hadn't you asked me for a reliable person to carry out certain tasks on your
personal account—a warrior who wouldn't flinch at performing the direst
duty?—I'm sending such a one. You may entrust any mission to him without
compunction, for his loyalty and courage are beyond question. Handwritten by the Crown Prince himself, too! There is a mystery afoot. I
wonder if my brother knows anything of all this? I must exercise the
greatest caution over this young man!” mumbled the Commander to
himself. He called the man who had scrounged about for the olai in the first
place and murmured a few instructions in his ear, after which the soldier
departed at once.
***

Vandhiyathevan was shown every honour and luxury due to a highly
eminent guest in Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's palace, where he was given a
bath, and new clothes. All his life, he had entertained a passion for dressing
well, and our young man made sure to enjoy the richness he was
surrounded in. Swathed in the latest fashion, he was next offered delicate,
six-flavoured dishes fit for a king—yet another opportunity the famished
young man made excellent use of, even forgetting, for the moment, his
worry over the missing olai.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's men escorted him to the palace's private art
gallery, the chithira mandapam, when he was finally done. “Do take a look
at the paintings that adorn these walls until the Commander returns,” said
his guards, while three of them retired to the front of the mandapam and
sprawled on the floor with abandon, trading gossip and playing their
favourite dice-game, chokkattaan.
Thanjaipuri, already famed as the Chozha's brand-new capital city, had also
gained renown far and wide in those days, as the center for arts and
sculpture, just as Thiruvaiyaaru had gained a staunch reputation for
classical dance and music.
The chithira mandapam in Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's palace, in particular,
had gained some note; Vandhiyathevan entered it now, and gazed in
stupefaction at the great many beautiful paintings that decorated the walls,
losing himself in the brilliant colours and their execution. Such was his
admiration for the works of art that he forgot himself, and even the
important mission he was engaged in.
In particular was he fascinated by the series of pictures that illustrated the
history of ancient Chozha kings, and various important events in their
personal lives. Many of the paintings in the mandapam were of the Chozha
dynasty's history in the last hundred years—and these were also the ones he
was most attracted to.
We would like, at this juncture, to gently prod our readers' memory with a
précis of the hundred or so odd years of Chozha history, as its illustrious
kings ruled from Pazhaiyarai and Thanjai. Such knowledge would prove
extremely useful in understanding and appreciating the rest of this story.

We have mentioned, prior to this, of Vijayalaya Chozha, who sported
ninety-six scars as the greatest of ornaments on his noble, battle-worn body.
Chozha kings took the royal titles Parakesari and Rajakesari by turns; once
Parakesari Vijayalaya Chozha's reign had come to an end, his son and heir
Rajakesari Aditha Chozha came to the throne, and proved a worthy
successor to his illustrious father. One of the first missions he accomplished
was to join the Pallavas, defeat the Pandiyas, and regain the Chozhas a good
deal of their lost footing in the political landscape. Next, he declared war on
the Pallava king Aparajitha Varman; Thondai Mandalam soon became a
vassal of the valiant Aditha Chozha, as he fought a decisive battle, leaping
upon the hapless Aparajitha Varman who came to war on his richly
decorated royal elephant, and sent him to his death. Kongu Nadu was swift
to enter his territories as well. Aditha Chozha proved to be a great devotee
of Siva Peruman; to him goes the credit of having established a great many
Siva temples all along the course of the sacred river Kaveri, as she sprung
from her source, in the Sahasya Hills, until she tumbled into the oceans.
Parakesari Paranthakan followed Aditha Chozha to the throne, and ruled
for forty-six long years; next to the glorious rule of Emperor Karikala
Peruvalathan, who bested the north and planted the tiger-flag atop the
Himalayas, Paranthakan was easily the greatest to follow in his footsteps.
After all, did not the various glorious titles such as Veera Narayanan,
Panditha Vathsalan, Kunjara Mallan and Soora Sigamani attest to it? In
addition, he bore the magnificent name of He Who Conquered Madurai and
Eezham; even during his time, the Chozha Empire had stretched from
Kanya Kumari in the south to the river Krishna, in the north. The Tiger-flag
fluttered with glorious abandon even in Eezham for a while; to this
Emperor must be attributed all the praise due to one who had sheathed the
Thillai Chitrambalam Temple in pure gold. Towards the end of his rule,
though, the Empire met some of its gravest dangers: the Rashtrakuda kings
who had acquired some notoriety in the north, had gained steadily in
strength and made inroads into Chozha territories. What was more
worrisome was that they had begun to taste some success in their
endeavours.
Paranthaka the First had three sons: the first, Rajadithya, was a warrior
among warriors, who spent a great deal of his time in Thirumunaippaadi on
the northern front, in daily anticipation of an invasion. He it was, who

brought the magnificent Veera Narayana Lake into existence, in honour of
his father.
At Thakkolam, near today's Arakkonam was fought a bloody battle, as the
Chozha and Rashtrakuda armies clashed furiously. It was here that
Rajadithya demonstrated his incredible valour in the battlefield, destroyed
his enemies in one fell swoop and embraced a warrior's death. Having given
up his life as he fought atop a war elephant, like the Pallava King
Aparajitha Varman, he was graced, in the inscriptions and copper-plates that
followed, with the title, He Who Embraced Death on an Elephant.
By rights, had Rajadithya survived the war, it would have been he who
eventually succeeded Paranthaka Chakravarthy on the Chozha throne. His
descendents would have followed him as heirs to the Empire, as per the
dictates of justice.
That, however, was not to be. Prince Rajadithya had died, and died without
issue, to complicate matters—which meant this his younger brother
Kandaradithyar acceded to his father's request, and ascended the throne.
Like his father and grandfather before him, he was filled with the fervour of
devotion to God, and a deep, unflagging love for Thamizh, as well. Unlike
them, however, he lacked the desire and passion to rule, much preferring to
spend a majority of his time in worship and savouring Thamizh literature.
So well did he immerse himself in such pursuits that he sang hymns in
praise of Siva Peruman, much like those composed by those staunch Siva
devotees, the Nayanmars. Known collectively as the Thiruvisaippaa, here is
a song that marks the last of it, and which he has sung, referring to himself:
Seeranmalgu Thillai chembon
Ambalathaadi thannaik
Kaaraar solaik Kozhi Vendhan
Thanjaiyarkon kalandha
Aaraavin sork Kandaradithan
Arunthamizh maalai vallaar
Pera ulagir perumaiyodum
Perinba meythuvare!

Vijayalaya's successors might have ruled from Thanjai and Pazhaiyarai, but
none had forgotten their antecedents, or that they hailed, originally, from the
city that had once been their capital, Uraiyur. This city sported another title,
“Kozhi,” which explained why they took pride in referring to themselves as
Kozhi Vendhar, or Kings of Kozhi.
Kandaradithyar might have ascended the throne and ruled in name—but
there was no doubt that it was his younger brother, Arinjaya, who took the
reigns of the Chozha Empire in his capable hands and administered it, in
full. The prince had accompanied Rajadithya while he camped with his
army in Thirunaavalur and other such bases; he had been a part of the
ferocious campaign against the Rashtrakudas, and managed to convert what
had seemed certain defeat, into victory for the Chozhas, in Thakkolam. Not
to mention the fact that he made sure the Rashtrakudas did not venture
further south, past the river Then Pennai.
All these were the factors that contributed to Rajakesari Kandaradithyar
making a very important political decision: he declared his younger brother
the Crown Prince to the country, along with the caveat that the latter would
succeed his brother on the Chozha throne, when the former's rule came to
an end.
Yet another reason did exist for his decision: Kandaradithyar had been
married earlier, but his wife had passed away long before he was crowned
Emperor; the thought of re-marriage had never entered his heart for many
years, after. Brother Arinjaya, however, had a son who excelled in not just
learning and martial arts, but beauty as well: in addition to being named
after his grandfather Paranthakan, he enjoyed the title of Sundara, one that
had been granted lovingly, by the people themselves. It seemed only natural
to Kandaradithyar that such an excellent young man should succeed
Arinjaya, after his time. He decided that such would be the case; ensured
that royal court officials such as Saamantha Kanam, those associated with
the armed forces such as Thandanaayakkas, and various representatives of
the public were made aware of, and assented to his decision. Accordingly,
once the required formalities were fulfilled, he made it known to his
subjects as well.
And yet—fate played its hand, once he had carried out his momentous
decision; a rather strange event occurred in Kandaradithyar's life. He

chanced to meet, at this late date, the young princess of the Mazhavarayar
clan; her beauty, grace, virtue and deep devotion to Siva Peruman
impressed him and despite his rather advanced years, he married her. A son
was born to them in due course and the happy couple named him
Madhuranthakan, showering him with love and affection.
Neither Emperor not his consort, however, had any mind to change
arrangements already made, with regard to the Chozha succession. Both
were immersed in devotion to Siva Peruman and had no desire for a life full
of pleasure; they wished to raise their son the same way. Firm in the belief
that ascension to the magnificent Siva Peruman's eternal celestial empire
was of far more merit than to the throne of puny kingdoms, they strove to
ensure that Madhuranthakan was deserving of a place in a heavenly abode,
rather than train him to be king of a small part of the earth. Kandaradithyar,
thus, took great pains to assure those around him, once more, that the
Chozha throne would pass on to Arinjaya and his son after his time, and no
one else.
Thus it was that the Chozha throne bypassed Rajadithya who was supposed
to have ascended it; Kandaradithya, who did ascend, but who had no great
desire to rule; on to Arinjaya and his descendents, who, it seemed, were
destined to inherit an empire.
Parakesari Arinjaya, however, did not rule the country for an extended
period of time; not long after Kandaradithya ascended to Siva's celestial
abode of Kailasam, his younger brother followed his footsteps to heaven. In
accordance with their wishes, the lords, officials and people of Chozha
Nadu decided, unanimously, to crown Arinjaya's son as the Emperor and so
it was done: Rajakesari Sundara Chozha duly ascended the throne, and
appeared properly cognizant of the great honour and good fortune that had
been granted to him. He ruled well, with a firm and just hand; ensured that
the lost territories of Thondai Mandalam and Pandiya Nadu were annexed
and a part of Chozha dominions once again, and drove away the
Rashtrakuda forces from the shores of the Then Pennai, once and for all.
His sons, Aditha Karikalar and Arulmozhi were phenomenal warriors in
their own right and seemed poised to overtake their own father, when it
came to goodwill and popularity. They were swift to assist their father

however necessary; went to wars, took initiative and fought battles at the
forefront at a very young age.
And Jayalakshmi, Goddess of Victory, stood by the Chozhas, granting
success at every single step.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 31

“Thieves! Thieves!”
Vandhiyathevan gazed at the portraits of every Chozha Emperor from the
victorious Vijayalaya to Paranthaka, also known as Sundara Chozha, with a
great deal of admiration and pleasure. Ah, the valour and courage of each of
these rulers! The great deeds they had accomplished; the wars and battles
they had fought, standing at the forefront without a care for their own lives!
Why, he hadn't heard such tales of daring even in the numerous epics that
abounded in the country. Chozha Nadu was fortunate indeed, to be ruled by
a dynasty such as this; indeed, so were the other lands under their
dominions, at present.
Fairly dazzled by the Chozha Emperors and their greatness he might have
been, but for all that, Vandhiyathevan hadn't failed to notice something
rather important, about all the portraits: each Emperor had had a Pazhuvoor
King by him, performing deeds of great assistance, aiding them in battle
and otherwise, to the best and more of their abilities.
A Pazhuvoor King had been the first to lay siege to and set foot into the
Thanjai fort when it had still been occupied by the Mutharaiyars. When
Vijayalaya floundered in the battle in Thiruppurambiyam, having lost both
his legs, a Pazhuvoor King had hastened to his aid, hoisting the Emperor on
his capable shoulders; his time assistance had allowed Vijayalaya to
perform a great many valorous deeds. A Pazhuvoor king had placed the
crown on Aditha Chozha's head, at his coronation. When that Emperor leapt
from his elephant to send Aparajitha Varman to his death, a Pazhuvoor king
had bent down, offering back and shoulders to support him. The
Pazhuvettarayars had been at the forefront of many of Paranthaka
Chakravarthy's battles, holding aloft the Chozha standard and tiger flag with
a proud mien. As Prince Rajadithya lay mortally wounded in the battlefield,
it was a Pazhuvettarayar who pulled the bleeding prince into his lap,

delivering the welcome news: “The Rashtrakudas are in retreat!” More of
the same staunch, unflinching service had been provided by them to the
Emperors Arinjayar and Sundara Chozha as well.
Vandhiyathevan noted all these and more evidence of the Pazhuvettarayar's
royal service, and was promptly immersed in speechless amazement. There
was reason enough, it seemed, for the brothers Pazhuvettarayar to exert
their authority over all of Chozha Nadu; neither could it be wondered at that
Sundara Chozha did not attempt a single decision without their expert
advice.
What was obvious, on the other hand, was that he, Vandhiyathevan, was in
serious difficulties, at the moment. There was no doubt that Chinna
Pazhuvettarayar entertained the gravest suspicions about him, and it was
only a matter of time before they were proven right. The truth about the
palm-tree signet ring would be out—and then the fat would truly be in the
fire! Vallavarayan had heard a great many harrowing tales of Thanjavur's
gloomy dungeons, under the direct supervision of its Commander. Perhaps
Vandhiyathevan would find himself clapped into it—and then he may as
well bid farewell to any hope of escape. Everyone knew that even if anyone
did manage to get out of it alive, it would only be as a blubbering, brainless
idiot in skin and bones, wholly devoid of his senses!
Ah, how was he to escape from such a predicament? One thing was certain:
he would have to come up with some ruse and leave this city before the
Pazhuvettarayar the Elder returned.
Even the overwhelming desire to meet the young queen of Pazhuvoor had
deserted our young hero; all he wanted that very moment, with every fibre
of his being, was to escape this city and its terrible dungeons, his life and
limbs intact. He might not have the olai, but he could deliver his message to
Kundhavai Piratti in person—and who cared, frankly, whether she believed
him, or didn't? How, how was he going to make his way out of this
wretched city?
Abruptly, he remembered something: what on earth had become of his old
clothes? There could only be one reason for why they had confiscated those
tattered garments, given him rich new attire, wined and dined him—check
his robes! Of course, it was all obvious now: the olai meant for Kundhavai
Devi must have fallen into the Commander's hands; no doubt about it. Now

he knew why he had grabbed Vandhiyathevan and held his hand so hard,
preventing the young man from slipping away with the poets. The reason
for the three-man strong escort was now clear as well. What he needed now
was a ruse—any ruse, to get away from this terrible toil—something,
anything, before Pazhuvettarayar returned—think, think—ah, yes! Here
was a ruse! No time to waste; to think was to act. He would give it all he
had. On guard—Vetrivel! Veeravel!
Vandhiyathevan peeped out of the decorated window of the chithira
mandapam. Chinna Pazhuvettarayar approached resplendently on his horse,
surrounded by his entourage. Ah, now was the time to carry out his plan;
not a moment to pause.
The trio playing chokkattaan in front of the gallery put a stop to their game
and rose; obviously, they had heard their master's impending arrival, as
well.
Vandhiyathevan walked up to them. “Beloved brothers, where are my old
clothes? Do you know?”
“What on earth do you want with those filthy garments?” queried one of the
menials. “We've obeyed our master's instructions and dressed you in new,
expensive silks, haven't we?”
“I don't need these. Do return my old clothes to me soon, and I shall be
content.”
“We've sent them out to be washed. The clothes will be returned to you
when they're done.”
“Absolutely not—I need my old garments at once. Thieves, all of you—I'd
stashed away some money in them, and you've obviously been trying to
steal it. Return my things at once, or else—!”
“Or else what, thambi? You'll chop our heads and pack them off to
Thanjavur, will you? But we are in Thanjai now, you know. You'd do well
to remember that.”
“Adei—will you return my clothes at once, or not?”
“Only if they exist, thambi. You see, we dropped the whole smelly bundle
in the river Vettaru. They'd be crocodile feed by now—and whoever heard
of getting anything back from a reptile's stomach?”

“Thieving bastards! So you're mocking me, are you? Just wait till I report
you to your master!” And Vandhiyathevan began to cross the threshold,
when one of the men approached him at a rapid pace, to bar his path.
Vandhiyathevan delivered a resounding punch to his face, and the man fell
on his back, gasping aloud. Blood gushed out of his nose.
Another came at Vandhiyathevan, hands outstretched, as though he wished
to wrestle him to the ground. Our young man promptly grabbed one of the
hands, thrust a leg neatly between both of his opponent's limbs and gave a
neat twist; the soldier shrieked a pain-filled “Ammadi!” and sat down with
an abrupt thump. By this time, the third was almost on top of
Vandhiyathevan; the warrior turned his legs and aimed a neat kick at the
soldier, who felt the full force of the blow and crashed down with a scream.
The three fallen men recovered within moments, rose and circled
Vandhiyathevan for another attack—very warily this time, it must be
mentioned.
By this time, the sounds of horses clattering up to the entrance of the palace
could be heard. Vandhiyathevan saw his chance, set up a loud yell of
“Thieves! Thieves!” and fell upon his would-be assailants. The latter tried
to restrain him, in vain, while Vandhiyathevan kept up his terrible
screeches. “Thieving scoundrels!” he bellowed, again.
This seemed to be the cue for Chinna Pazhuvettarayar to enter the scene.
“What is the commotion, here?” he demanded.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 32

An Inquisition
Vandhiyathevan ceased to fight the moment he saw Chinna
Pazhuvettarayar, and began to walk towards him. His assailants scrambled
forward and hung on to him in a bid to stop his progress. The young man
cared not a whit, and took four steps forward. “Not a moment too soon,
Commander! These thieving scoundrels not only stole my clothes, but tried
to kill me as well. Ah, is this how you treat you guests? Am I to believe that
this is the best example of Thanjai's manners and morals? I am, if you
please, not just someone visiting you, but an honoured guest of the Emperor
—you did hear the Empress's words, didn't you? I'm not quite a nobody as
you're well aware—I'm an emissary of the Crown Prince himself. If your
wretched men could treat me, a royal messenger thus, what might be the
fate of ordinary mortals? Frankly, my lord, I'm surprised you have such
rascals in your service. We wouldn't even let such men enter our thresholds,
in Thondai Mandalam—we'd sentence them to death on a sharp
kazhumaram, first!” And Vandhiyathevan paused to take a breath, after his
breathless exposition.
As for Chinna Pazhuvettarayar—he had not quite recovered, yet, from
Vallavarayan's almost effortless handling of the three stocky men who had
attempted to strangle him; visions of his martial prowess still clouded his
memory. Ah, a warrior such as this would be a shining ornament to his own
regiment! He must get this young man to join his ranks, somehow.
“Patience, thambi, patience,” he soothed, voice practically dripping with
tranquility and goodwill. “I find it rather difficult to believe that my men
could have been quite so stupid. I shall make enquires, shall I?”
“That, precisely, is my desire as well, Commander. Interrogate them well,
my lord, and deliver me justice,” shot back Vallavarayan. “Not to mention
my clothes and valuables as well.”

“Adei, you idiots—leave that lad alone, for a moment. What were my
instructions to you, and what is it that you have accomplished, now?”
chided Chinna Pazhuvettarayar. “Why on earth did you lay hands on him?”
“We carried out every word of your command, Yejamaan: we escorted this
young man here, gave him a luxurious oil-bath and treated him to a sixflavoured feast fit for a king. We gave him a great many ornaments to wear
as well and brought him here to the chithira mandapam. He spent some
time gazing at the portraits—and then, suddenly, came to us, asking for his
old clothes,” explained a man. “And then he practically pounced on us!”
“But you, three bulky men, could not handle that boy's blows, could you?”
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's hard eyes glowed blood-red with rage and
mortification.
“If we hesitated, Master, it was only because he was a royal guest. Give us
leave now, and we'll tear him into pieces—”
“Enough of these tall tales, idiots! Well, thambi? What about you?”
“Give them the leave they ask for, I say. And give me leave as well,
Commander. It's been quite a while since I grappled with Chozha Nadu's
foes—my shoulders practically ache for the exercise. I'd be delighted to
teach them a lesson on perfect behaviour towards royal guests!”
“Admirable, my boy,” Chinna Pazhuvettarayar smiled a little. “But you
would do well to reserve your teaching instincts for genuine traitors of the
Chozhas. The Chakravarthy is ill, after all, and orders are to allow no
disputes or altercations of any kind within the fort, that his peace might be
undisturbed.”
“In that case, kindly ask these men to return my garments and belongings at
once.”
“Where are they, you three?”
“Master, we have kept them safe, as per your orders.”
“Ah, how they lie, these immoral idiots, Commander—and right to your
face as well! A few moments ago, they swore that my clothes had been
delivered to be washed, and now they declare they are “kept safe,” as per
your instructions,” exploded Vandhiyathevan. “Beware, my lord—they'll
brand you a thief in a little while!”

“Why, you dimwitted nincompoops,” glared Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, at his
hapless men. “All I said was to dress this young man in new clothes—I
never mentioned a thing about his old garments, did I? Be that as it may, do
ignore them, thambi—they blabber uselessly at the best of times. But why
do you care so much about your old attire? Er—did you, perhaps, store
valuables in them?”
“A few gold coins for my journey, yes—” before Vandhiyathevan could
continue, Chinna Pazhuvettarayar cut in. “Those would be of no account,
thambi. I shall supply you with all the gold you may need.”
“I'm Crown Prince's Aditha Karikalar's envoy, Commander. I'm not in the
habit of receiving money from outsiders—”
“In that case, I shall make arrangements to deliver your own clothes and
money to you, never fear. But—you had nothing else in your possession,
did you?”
Vandhiyathevan spent a moment in thought; Chinna Pazhuvettarayar was
quick to notice his pause. “I did carry something else—something that was
very important, indeed. I hope your men haven't laid a finger on it. If they
did, they're done for —!”
“Such fury in one so young! Perhaps that is why you forget where you are,
and whom you address these words to. I shall ignore your heated words for
the sake of your youth. But what was this precious article?”
“I'm afraid I can't reveal that, Commander. It's rather confidential.”
“Indeed? Thanjai can harbour no secrets that I cannot know of, thambi.”
“This, however, is a secret Aditha Karikalar entrusted to me.”
“The Crown Prince is the Vadathisai Maathanda Nayakar, the Chief of the
Northern Armed Forces—his authority may be enforced only north of the
river Paalaaru. Here, however, it is the Chakravarthy who rules supreme.”
“The Chakravarthy's authority extends to wherever the Tiger-flag flies high,
Commander. Surely there can be no two ways about that?”
“For that very reason, there can be nothing that I may not know of; no
secrets within the confines of this fort. The Emperor's well-being and
security depend on it, you see—”

“Commander, the whole of Chozha Nadu owes tremendous gratitude to you
and Periya Pazhuvettarayar, for guarding the Emperor's sacred person so
jealously. I heard the Chakravarthy himself praise you today in the audience
chamber, my lord—he mentioned that even Yama, the God of Death feared
to set foot in Thanjai, bowing to your rule, here. Rare words, don't you
think?”
“Certainly I do. Who knows what terrible fate might have befallen the
Emperor, had we not brought him from Pazhaiyarai to Thanjavur? Those
Pandiya traitors may have even carried out their perfidious plans.”
“Ah, you say so, as well! Everything I've heard so far must certainly be true,
I suppose.”
“And what is it that you heard?”
“That there are traitorous conspiracies being evolved against the Emperor.
And that there's another, being woven against his beloved sons as well.”
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar ground his teeth, hard as vajram, and bit his lips.
All these moments of conversation with this boy—and only now had the
realization come to him, very slowly, that his had been the defeat, in this
cunning war of words. He had traded barbs with this lad, hoping to catch
him out in a lie—but all that had happened was that the Commander of
Thanjai had been forced to pacify Vandhiyathevan, supplying halting
explanations to assuage the boy's suspicions! Well, that would not serve any
more. Enough was enough. This conversation would end, now.
“You need not worry your head about such things, thambi. I and my brother
are more than capable of destroying any and every conspiracy plotted
against any member of the royal family,” he said, curtly. “All you have to
do is submit your request—you wish your old clothes back. That is all, is it
not?”
“My old garments—and whatever I carried within them.”
“Which you have not exactly revealed, so far.”
“I shall, since you insist—but I may as well tell you that the consequences
must devolve upon you. Prince Aditha Karikalar presented me an olai for
the Chakravarthy, yes. He asked me to deliver another olai, as well.”
“Did he, now? To whom? You never dropped a hint as to this, until now.”

“As I mentioned before, it was supposed to be confidential, Commander.
I'm revealing it to you now, as you insisted on knowing. The other olai was
meant for Ilaiya Piratti Kundhavai Devi, in Pazhaiyarai.”
“Oh? In that case, you certainly cannot leave for Kanchi right away, even if
you do receive the Emperor's thirumugam tomorrow. I wonder what exactly
prompted the Crown Prince to send a confidential olai post-haste to the
Ilaiya Piratti?”
“I'm afraid I'm not in the habit of reading confidential missives,
Commander. I didn't, however, have any objection to your reading the olai
meant for the Chakravarthy, so I shall not have any, to this either. That
responsibility as I mentioned earlier, rests upon you. What I do want are my
old clothes and belongings, as soon as possible.”
“Rest assured that you will certainly receive those. I shall ensure it myself,”
snapped the Commander, and began to walk away. Vandhiyathevan
followed him. Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, who had noted his presence,
communicated a message to his men with a look, upon which five or six
armed warriors stepped in front of Vallavarayan, spears barring his way.
There was no point in picking a quarrel with them, felt the young man, and
gave in, resigned to a wait.
Thanjai fort's Commander returned in a little while—and behind him came
a man, carrying Vandhiyathevan's old clothes on an elaborately decorated
platter, for all the world as though they were precious jewels paraded in a
wedding procession.
“Here are your clothes, thambi,” waved Chinna Pazhuvettarayar. “Do
inspect them to see if everything as it should be.”
Vandhiyathevan took the Commander at his word and duly carried out a
thorough scrutiny. He unraveled his waistband, to find that it contained a
great many more gold coins than before. The olai meant for Kundhavai
Devi was within, as well. But how on earth did so many gold coins find
their way in here? And how had the olai, which had been missing the first
time, suddenly appear now? Well, there was only one explanation; it must
have fallen into the clutches of Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, who had stuffed it
in just now, post Vandhiyathevan's persistent questions. I wonder why,
mused the young man. And why is there so much more gold than I need?

Ah, he's a wily one, Thanjai's Commander. There was more to this than met
the eye, and Vandhiyathevan wondered just how much more Chinna
Pazhuvettarayar would put him through, before he was done. There was no
doubt that he would have to be very careful indeed and never let his guard
down for a single moment.
“Everything is to your satisfaction, thambi?” enquired the Commander,
solicitously. “Gold and precious belongings included?”
“In a moment, my lord,” Vandhiyathevan replied and began counting the
gold coins. He piled the excess number in a heap, and pushed them away.
“Commander, I'm a scion of the Vaanar dynasty; a messenger of the
peerless warrior Aditha Karikalar. I neither crave nor need anything that
isn't mine.”
“Your honesty is to be commended, but I rather think you may need this for
your journey. Now, when exactly do you wish to leave? Today? Or will you
take your ease and wait until tonight, to meet the Elder?”
“Certainly I shall stay tonight. I have no desire to leave until after an
audience with Periya Pazhuvettarayar, my lord. Meanwhile—you'd better
command your men never to lay a hand on my belongings,” warned
Vandhiyathevan, raking in the gold coins in their entirety, and binding them
up, carefully, in his waistband.
“Delighted, I am sure. I can assure you that you will meet with no further
iniquity, from my men. You may ask, and receive whatever you wish.”
“Well, I do cherish one great desire—to sightsee this beautiful Thanjai city.
I may, mayn't I?”
“Certainly you may. Two of my men here shall be more than happy to show
you around. A word of warning, though: do not venture outside the fort, for
the gates will be closed at sunset, and you will not be able to enter, no
matter how hard you try. You are free, however, to wander where you will,
within the city.” And Chinna Pazhuvettarayar called forward two of his
henchmen, whispering something into their ears.
Vandhiyathevan, watching, him, did not find it very difficult to guess what
the whispered message might have been.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 33

A Maid in a Tree!
With two of Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's men flanking him on either side,
Vandhiyathevan set off on his grand tour of the city of Thanjavur, in state.
That his escorts were to prevent his escape was obvious; equally evident
was the fact that the sentries at the fortress gates had received orders to
never let anyone leave the city, that day. Nevertheless, Vandhiyathevan
determined to make his way out before midnight—he would have to, if he
wished to slip out of the terrible fate of meeting Periya Pazhuvettarayar.
Lingering any more would reduce his chances of escape considerably—nay,
his very hope of staying alive!
His mind came up with a variety of strategies to make his way out, even as
he wandered along one street after another, gazing at the sights. The first
order of the day was to slip away from the clutches of his two demon-like
guards, and then, from the fort—but how on earth was he to manage it? For
the life of him, he could not evolve a suitable plan that would answer all his
purposes.
To tell the truth, it wouldn't present a great deal of difficulty to overpower
these men; he could flip them over his shoulder in an instant and slither
away into the crowds—but where? It was common knowledge that the
Pazhuvettarayar brothers had strengthened the Thanjavur fort beyond
belief; people were prone to say that not even a breeze could enter its
confines without their permission. Why, even the Emperor had mentioned,
this morning, that Yama himself quaked with fear about breaching its
borders. How was he, a lone man, to manage it, then? All he had to do was
lay a finger on his guards and they would set up a yell that would send him
straight to the city's dungeons. That, or he would lose his life in an instant.
No, attacking his sentries was not the solution; he would have to strategize
his escape—first from these men, and then, from this blasted city. Well—no

fort worth the name had ever existed without a secret passage of some kind,
had it? The stronger the fortress, in fact, the more the chances of a secret
passage, somewhere. But how was he to discover it? Who would possess
information of that kind? More importantly, even if they did, would they
ever divulge it to him?
Even as he walked along, revolving and discarding one scheme after
another, his mind recalled the young queen of Pazhuvoor. Ah, if there was
anyone in this wretched fort who might extend a helping hand, it would
have to be that gracious lady. Admittedly, this was a bit of a stretch, but he
could use Azhwarkkadiyaan's name to get into her good graces. Things
should proceed quite easily after that—but he would have to find Periya
Pazhuvettarayar's palace first, to make headway along this circuitous route.
And even then, he would have to give the slip to these men, who mustn't
suspect his intentions of visiting the Ilaiya Rani. If they did, they would
march straight to Chinna Pazhuvettarayar with the news, and that would
truly be the end of it all. But oh, here was another terrible thought: what if
Periya Pazhuvettarayar himself arrived home as he, Vandhiyathevan, was
visiting the young queen? He would not only be guilty of entering a
ferocious lion's den, but sticking his head into its mouth as well.
Seemingly immersed he might have been in the city's sights, but for all that,
Vandhiyathevan had not failed to make use of his eyes and mouth;
questions poured out of his lips in an unending stream. “What's
that?”—“And
this?—“Whose
palace
is
that?”—“What's
this
building?”—“Is that a gopuram?”—“What about this mansion?” His ears
pricked up every time, wondering if he would get “This is Periya
Pazhuvettarayar's palace,” or “This is the young queen of Pazhuvoor's
mansion,” for a reply. His eyes swung around in all four directions, eager to
take in anything and everything. And as they did, one thing entered his sight
and affixed itself in his brains very well: Thanjai might possess wide
avenues thronging with people and vehicles—but it also accommodated a
great many tiny lanes, alleys, little alcoves, nooks and crannies, not to
mention gardens thick with leafy trees. It would not be terribly difficult,
Vandhiyathevan mused, to dart into one of those little lanes, scramble up a
tree and hide away inside some sprawling garden. It would even be possible
to stay concealed for a day or two—but what was important was to make an
escape without anyone noticing, and to ensure that no one looked for him.

Either of which would certainly prove impossible if Chinna Pazhuvettarayar
sent out a swarm of his seemingly endless supply of soldiers, to conduct a
search.
Or Vandhiyathevan had another option: beg for asylum at someone's home.
And who else but the Ilaiya Rani would take pity on him, in this vast
Thanjai city? He'd simply have to use all the powers of his considerable
imagination and spin a story so fantastic that she'd have no choice but to
believe him. And the first step towards accomplishing all this would be to
escape the clutches of his guards—
Ah, what's this commotion? Who's shouting? Who are these people and why
are they going about in such crowds? Thanks be to God—there's no doubt
You are on my side, this instant! For I can see a way—here's the ruse I
need, the perfect tool to make my escape—!
Vandhiyathevan had just arrived at a junction in one of the many lanes that
cut through a large avenue, and stumbled upon the sight of a large crowd
passing by, chanting in victorious voices that pierced the heavens, clashing
cymbals and other instruments. It was easy to see that this was the
Velakkara Regiment, on their way out of the fort after an audience with the
Emperor. What if he simply blended in with them—ah, surely there couldn't
be a better way to effect his escape?
He was quite sure that his persistent escorts would certainly never let him
get away quite so easily; they would pursue him even through the chaotic
Regiment. And it would be no easy matter to slip through the imposing
gates, either; surely no sentry worth the title would be quite so stupid as to
let him just walk away? They would stop him—but on the other hand, what
other choice did he have? He would have to be a fool indeed, to ignore this
god-sent opportunity to make his way out.
He turned, as usual, to the men by him, asking who the passing men were
and what they did here. Once he received the answer that “they were the
Velakkara Regiment,” he began plying his escorts with questions. He
wished, he prattled on, to join this brave band of soldiers, and wanted to
approach them, see them at close quarters—and began inching his way
towards the noisy clan. A little later, he exclaimed, airily, that he wished
very much to see the men who played the thaarai and thappattai

instruments at the front of the regiment—and promptly mingled with the
crowd.
Even as the Regiment moved forward, Vandhiyathevan shifted along with
them, going forwards and backwards, this side and that, yelling victorious
chants in an enthusiastic voice that threatened to drown out even the
Velakkara soldiers. Some of the latter stared hard at him, wondering at his
identity; some pegged him for an idiot, excited at the sight of a crowd;
others looked amused, obviously thinking he had indulged himself with
spirits just a little too much. No one, however, tried to stop him, or push
him away.
His escorts stayed by the sidelines, frankly nervous about mixing with the
boisterous crowd. Somehow, he was sure to step out, somewhere, they
consoled themselves, and assuaged their conscience by standing aside,
peeping through the crowds occasionally.
At that moment, a young woman carrying a basket of curds, paused by an
alley, to allow the Regiment to pass. One of the soldiers minced up to her.
“I am very thirsty, Amma—may I have some curd?”
“Not curds,” that young lady, not to be outdone, spat a retort. “But I can
certainly deliver two sound slaps to your cheek!”
“Will you, now?” shot back the soldier. “Then you may as well give me one
of those!” He stepped closer to the young woman who shied away, and
suddenly, took to her heels. The soldier set off in pursuit; two more men
broke away from the Regiment, haring after their mate. As every one of the
runners began to set up shouts and yells, darting here and there, no one
quite knew what the commotion was about; only that there was great deal of
entertainment involved.
Vandhiyathevan, watching all this, came to a sudden decision. As we have
seen quite a few times before, to think was to act for our young man; the
word hesitation had no place in his adventurous life. And once he had come
to conclusion, to pause and reflect was alien to his very nature.
Accordingly, he acted.
“Run! Run!” he shrieked, and took off after the soldiers in pursuit of the
young curd-seller. “Catch her! Get her!” The lass ran for a while, and into a
narrow alley—but when her pursuers entered it, panting, they could see

nothing of her. She had vanished! The soldiers, however, seemed to have
decided that enough was enough; they gave up their sport and returned to
their own.
Vandhiyathevan, however, did not.
He ran for a while along the curd-seller's lane and scurried around two or
three more corners. Then, and only then did he slacken his pace somewhat,
and fall to a walk.
We know, don't we, that the Velakkara Regiment usually left the fort at
sunset? The day ended earlier in the little lanes Vandhiyathevan walked
through; they were already shrouded in darkness. Sometimes, he strode
along streets with stone walls, or madhils towering on either side; at others,
just a simple fence, interspersed with foliage. No matter; Vandhiyathevan
did not stop for an instant, uncaring of his direction. Small lanes and alleys,
no matter how circuitously they led, would have to end in the outer fort
walls at some point. He would decide his next course of action once he had
reached his destination. He had the whole night to think up a dozen
different ruses, didn't he?
Night fell completely, in a while—and Vandhiyathevan's path did end in a
fort wall. In fact, he knew that he had reached an impasse in his journey
only when he butted, slightly, against solid stone, in the thick of the night.
He could not really guess, however, at its height or other dimensions; for all
he knew, it may well be the outer fort-wall itself. In which case, the best
option at the moment was to squat at its base. The moon would rise, soon,
and he would know more in its pearly light. Certainly, no better place could
be found to hide away in this sprawling city. His erstwhile escorts would
have returned to Chinna Pazhuvettarayar by now and delivered the news;
the Commander would have sent his men out, at once, in pursuit. He might
even have suspected Vandhiyathevan of having made his escape with the
Velakkara Regiment; it was certain that soldiers would be wandering the
thoroughfares, looking for him both within the city and without. Let them
tear their collective hairs out, by all means. Let them search for him
endlessly and embrace defeat. I shall dupe them all and make my escape out
of this fort right under their very stupid noses, or my name isn't
Vandhiyathevan—nor am I a scion of the famed Vaanar clan!

Moonrise would, however, present difficulties for him too;
Pazhuvettarayar's soldiers would find the light an ally, as well. They might
even run him to earth here—ha, much good that would do them. Not a
whisper of Vandhiyathevan would they find here, if their quarry chose to
hide himself within these dense groves!
He leant back against the stone wall and slid down, to sit on the ground.
Running around endlessly all day, the strenuous exercise and his own youth
conspired to make him drowsy; his eyelids drooped. The west wind stirred
the trees nearby; branches rustled against one another, soothing him with a
pleasant, shushing lullaby that calmed his senses. Vandhiyathevan fell
asleep.
By the time he awoke, the moon had risen and climbed a little, up the
eastern sky. Pale light dappled the ground amidst the tree branches and
leaves, and Vandhiyathevan managed to take in a little of his surroundings.
He remembered the day's events, took stock of himself, and was frankly
astonished that he had actually managed to fall asleep under such
circumstances. Even more amazing, however, was the reason for his
awakening. What exactly had roused him? Hadn't it seemed like a voice?
Human? Or an animal's? A bird's call, perhaps? Had he, in fact, heard a
voice?
Vandhiyathevan craned his neck and peered above, to gaze at the wall
towering above him in the patchy moonlight. This, he decided, could not
really be the fort wall; those were usually much, much higher. Was there,
perhaps, a smaller wall within a larger one? Or was this the outer wall of
some sort of palace's garden?
Still craning his neck, Vandhiyathevan rose—and his heart skipped several
beats. His intestines seemed to uncoil themselves and climb up, choking his
throat. Sheer terror stifled him for a moment. There, on a branch above the
wall—what on earth was it? Memories of every single tale of vedhaalams,
apparitions that haunted trees, flooded his mind.
But—could ghosts speak in a human voice? A young woman's too? This
particular spirit seemed to possess such capabilities, at any rate.
Vandhiyathevan decided that he would listen to it, before he came to unjust
conclusions.

“Well, Ayya? Did you fall asleep against the wall? How many more times
am I supposed to call out to you?”
Ha—not a misplaced apparition haunting trees; this truly was a young
human woman, talking from a branch. Was all this a fantastic dream?
Surely such things didn't happen in real life!
“Of all the ridiculous —! You still look half-asleep. Here, I'm sending down
a ladder. Climb up carefully, will you? I don't want you slipping and
breaking your neck.”
And the lass pulled up a slender bamboo ladder from her side and pushed it
outside, leaning it against the wall.
None of this made any sense to Vandhiyathevan, of course—but when had
he ever refused to make use of a god-sent opportunity, a rare chance that
practically offered itself to him, thus?
What must happen would happen; he would deal with anything that fate
threw at him. Climbing up the ladder was the priority, now. As to what
came after—he would confront it when he reached the top of the wall.
He had climbed almost three-quarters of the ladder, when the young woman
spoke again. “I never knew anyone for being so late. There's the Ilaiya
Rani, the young queen, waiting endlessly—and here you are, snoring
against the palace wall!”
Vandhiyathevan almost fell off the ladder in shock. Fortunately, he grabbed
hold of a random stone that jutted out of the wall, and managed to right
himself in the nick of time.
The Ilaiya Rani! Surely it couldn't mean—yet, who else could it be, but the
young queen of Pazhuvoor? How on earth could she have possibly known
that he, Vandhiyathevan, was squatting at the bottom of her wall? Truly, she
must possess some sort of magic that allowed her to see such things! She
certainly did seem intensely interested in meeting him, didn't she? But stay
—perhaps—perhaps he had climbed up a ladder meant for another?
No matter. Vandhiyathevan had stepped forward; there was no going back.
He would see this right to the end—and that wouldn't be too long, now.
He approached the top, and the young woman put out a hand, pulling him
up. Moonlight bathed her face—but by this time, Vandhiyathevan had lost

all capability of feeling any surprise whatsoever. How else could he have
not fallen off the wall, even after seeing that this lass was none other than
the young curd-seller, pursued so hotly by the Velakkara Regiment, that
very evening? Truth be told, nothing, no matter how peculiar, would amaze
him anymore tonight.
“Come—are you going to squat on that wall and gape forever? Pull the
ladder in and climb down, quick!” And the young woman slipped down the
tree swiftly.
Vandhiyathevan obeyed. He had landed, it seemed, in some sort of
elaborate palace garden. In the distance rose a large palace's many
gopurams, gables and towers, shimmering in the pearly moonlight like
something out of a fairyland.
He cleared his throat, intending to ask whose palace this was—when he was
silenced by a peremptory “Hush!” from the young woman, who signed him
to silence, with a finger on her lips, and walked forward.
Vandhiyathevan gave in, and followed her.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 34

The Latha Mandapam
The young woman walked swiftly along a narrow path that meandered
through an almost impenetrable mango-grove, and Vandhiyathevan
followed her swiftly. No easy task, this; so dense was the foliage, the
luxurious growth of bushes that he stumbled often. Once, when he
hesitated, having almost run into a tree, the lass turned back to stare at him.
“What are you dawdling there for? Surely you haven't forgotten the way?
You've eyes that can pierce the darkness, haven't you?”
Vandhiyathevan simply brought a finger to his lips and returned her own
answer: “Hush!”
Scrabbling noises and muffled commotion outside the palace walls reached
them at that moment—it sounded like men scuffling about.
Man and girl walked on a little distance. A few moments later,
Vandhiyathevan gave a low chuckle.
The young woman turned and raised an eyebrow. “See anything that
amuses you?”
“Nothing I see—only what I can hear.”
“And that would be —?”
“Don't tell me you didn't hear the footsteps of those who were pursuing me,
hotfoot. I couldn't help laughing at the thought of their intense
disappointment.”
She looked suddenly fearful. “Someone's pursuing you? But why?”
“Why else did you think I was squatting at the bottom of a wall, bumbling
about like a sightless loon?”

The wind rustled through the trees, unsettling heaving branches; a stray ray
of moonlight fell on Vandhiyathevan's face. The girl gaped at him, face
wreathed in perplexion.
“What on earth are you staring at?” he queried.
“I was wondering if you were, well—you.”
“If I weren't I, who else would I be?”
“Well, you had a large moustache the last time you came, didn't you?”
“But how intelligent, my girl. A man like me, who makes his living
climbing on and off walls at night—do you really think I could survive
without a disguise to suit every occasion?”
“And you look, well—younger, too.”
“As to that, a man who is in good spirits always drinks from the fountain of
youth.”
“You're in good spirits? Why?”
“The gracious and bountiful condescension of your beautiful Maharani
would ensure the happiness of anyone.”
“Don't you dare mock her. She may be the young queen now, but there's no
doubt that she will become a Maharani, someday.”
“My sentiments, exactly.”
“Ha, you agree, do you? And what's to stop you from arguing that she
became one only because of your magic and tricks? Why, you wouldn't
even hesitate to demand half the empire from her!”
By this time, Vandhiyathevan had learnt a good deal of what he intended
and stayed silent, choosing to spend his time, instead, in furious thought.
Who, he wondered, was he really about to meet? The Pazhuvoor Ilaiya
Rani? Equally, it could also be Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's daughter, who had
lately married Madhuranthaka Devar. His escort was leading him towards
the palace, obviously under the film belief that he was some sort of
magician and now, he was about to meet this mysterious “Ilaiya Rani”—but
how on earth was he to conduct himself in her presence? Ah, be still, my
beating heart! As long as you retain your courage, there's still hope. After

all, there would be no dearth of clever ruses he could use, to make his
escape—his brain had never had failed to help him out of precarious
situations. Why on earth would it betray him now, especially against a
woman?
They approached a large palace, but went neither to its front entrance, nor
the back. Instead, they seemed to be making straight for an appendage of
the palace that jutted out from the building proper—a sensual, beautifully
carved and decorated latha mandapam, in fact. On closer inspection, it
became clear that this artfully embellished gallery was actually built as a
passageway that connected two enormous palaces, both of which seemed to
be markedly different: the one on the right shimmered against the night sky,
lit with glowing lamps, filled with the echoes of human voices and sounds
of occupation. The palace to the left, however, had not even a single lit
lamp, even a tiny one. Its walls rose to the sky, pale in the moonlight, but it
remained shrouded in silence and darkness.
Once they were at the latha mandapam, the girl signed to Vandhiyathevan
to him to stay where he was. It was only when he obeyed, that the young
man drew a deep breath—and promptly took in the fragrance of the flowers
around him. Such fragrance—such a deep, overwhelming scent! Why, they
wreathed around him, rose to his very brain and almost overpowered him
with their heady perfume!
The young woman entered the gallery and obviously engaged in
conversation—for a sweet, feminine voice immediately joined hers. “Do
you even need to ask? Show him in at once—I've been waiting an age!”
That voice—it wended itself through his brain and turned him giddy with
pleasurable anticipation. The Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani, no doubt. In an instant,
he would be in front of her; how was he to handle the situation? And she—
what would her reaction be, once she saw that the man who stood in front
of her was not the magician she awaited, but the one who had rammed into
her palanquin? Would she be taken aback with surprise? Perhaps she would
be delighted? Or—or would she choose not to reveal any emotion?
But stay—here was his young guide, back at the entrance to the latha
mandapam. She was signing for him to enter.

Vandhiyathevan walked to where she stood, and peered within the gallery.
In an instant, the scene entered his brain through his eyes, and seared itself
into his memory.
A lamp glowed bright, affixed to a stand of burnished gold, sending its rich,
vivid radiance into all corners of the gallery. Some sort of incense had
obviously been added to the oil; a sweet fragrance threaded its way
throughout. An ornate saprakooda couch stood within, strewn with fragrant
flowers, and a young lady reclined on it, majesty and grace limning every
part of her.
It was indeed, the young queen of Pazhuvoor.
If she had seemed lovely in the stark light of day, within her palanquin—
she appeared to be the epitome of exquisite beauty at night, a very goddess
come down to earth in her divine glory, seated on her couch, her stunning
profile thrown into relief in the golden radiance of a lamp.
The lamp's dazzling light; the gently soothing incense; the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya
Rani's striking beauty—all of these served to send Vandhiyathevan offkilter, his senses reeling, brain fuzzy with the sheer magnificence of it all.
Careful, Vandhiyatheva! You dared to touch liquor only once—but you still
remember, don't you, the terrible power it had over your faculties? The way
it rendered you senseless, weak and inebriated? You swore never to touch a
drop of it again. Remember your pledge—and steel yourself. Do not
succumb to this intoxication, far, far more weakening than those of spirits!
Nandhini, young queen of Pazhuvoor, gazed at him, her soft coral-red lips
parted a little in surprise, revealing pearly white teeth. Her temporary
speechlessness served to assist Vandhiyathevan's cause, to tell the truth.
He laughed gently, and gazed back at her. “My lady, your maid entertained
the strangest suspicions about me—she wanted to know if I was a magician,
or not. And how do you think she chose to address it? She turned to me and
asked, Are you, you?” He chuckled again.
Nandhini smiled. A flash of lightning dazzled Vandhiyathevan's vision; a
sweet shower of honey seemed to drench him.
“She's certainly prone to a variety of strange fancies, I'm afraid. Vasuki,
why do you still stand here like a tree? Return to your place—and if you

hear the slightest footstep, slam the door closed.”
“As you wish, Amma.” And Vasuki retired, walking along a pathway that
led within the latha mandapam towards the brightly lit palace, reached her
place by the dimly lit entrance, and sat down.
Nandhini lowered her voice a little. “She didn't quite believe that you were
a magician, you say? Silly little fool. More than half the ones who call
themselves so are all deceivers, I tell you. But you—you truly are one.
What sort of spell did you weave to suddenly spring up here?”
“Nothing quite so dramatic, my lady. All I did was climb up a ladder by the
wall.”
“That, is quite obvious—what I meant was, what sort of magic charm did
you use to fool this young woman?”
“I turned on the full force of my charismatic smile on her, under the light of
the beautiful moon. Failing that, I was hoping to show her the palm-tree
signet ring you kindly bestowed upon me.”
“So you do have it safe? Surely you could have just walked in through the
front entrance in broad daylight? Why skulk around in this stifling
darkness?”
“If you wouldn't think it amiss, my lady, I should like to inform you that
your brother-in-law Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's men are thieving rascals.
First, they tried to make away with my clothes and belongings; next, they
followed me all around the city without leaving my side an instant. Ah, the
devious ruses I had to employ, just to get away from their surveillance! I
managed to escape, run through all the alleys and by-lanes I could think of,
wriggle through nooks and crannies and finally made my way to your
palace, wandering all around it. That's when I clapped my eyes on the
ladder against the wall, heaved a sigh of relief that you had remembered
this pitiful creature, and tried to aid me. This, I now know to be a mistake.
Accept my apologies.”
“There doesn't seem to be a need to offer any.”
“But—why not, Ammani?”
“You weren't quite that far off, in your assumptions. Do you know why I
wished to consult a magician?”

“I'm afraid not. I confess I have no knowledge of either sorcery or
astrology.”
“I've been thinking of you ever since last morning, you see. I wondered why
you hadn't come to visit me, yet. And that was why I wanted to confer with
a magician.”
“Surprising, indeed.”
“What is?”
“What you said, just now. Because—I've been thinking of you ever since
last morning, as well!”
“Do you believe in past lives? The threads that bind us from one birth to
another?”
“What exactly does that mean?”
“I've heard it said that sometimes, when two people are bound by
friendship, or some sort of relationship in one birth, that bond continues in
their next births as well.”
“Until yesterday, I would've laughed at such an idea. Now, though—I find
that I'm beginning to believe in such things.”
For all outward purposes, Vandhiyathevan was merely spouting a
convenient lie, but in his mind's eye, it must be admitted, flashed a memory
of the young woman he had encountered at the Kudandhai astrologer's
home. Nandhini, however, had no way of knowing his innermost thought
processes, had she? The young queen of Pazhuvoor assumed
Vandhiyathevan to be talking of her.
“But that wasn't why you wished to visit me, was it? There was some
mention of a message from Azhwarkkadiyaar Nambi—”
“Indeed, yes, Ammani. Delivering it was certainly my first intention. Once I
set eyes on you, however, I simply forgot—everything.”
“Where did you meet Azhwarkkadiyaar? What was his message to me?”
“A little outside Veera Narayanapuram—he was, at that moment, trying to
establish the superiority of Vaishnavism with the strength of his staff. Periya
Pazhuvettarayar's grand procession passed us on their way to Kadambur, at

that moment, and doubtless, sounds of the his argument must have reached
your ears, for you put out a slender golden hand, and pushed aside the silkscreen of your palanquin. That was when Azhwarkkadiyaar recognized you,
and wished to send a message. He believed I would be able to pass it on, as
I stayed at the Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar Palace that night—but much to
my misfortune, I couldn't gain an audience with you, until outside the
Thanjavur fort—and that was only because your palanquin knocked into my
horse!”
Nandhini had been gazing at some point above her, all this while;
Vandhiyathevan could not gauge her thoughts or emotions from what he
could see of her face. When he finished, however, she turned to him.
“Indeed,” her face was wreathed in an exquisite smile. “The palanquins I
climb into always happen to be wickedly troublesome, don't they?”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 35

The Magician
Somewhere in the distance, large and festive ekkalams blared to the high
heavens; perigais thundered their steady beats, echoing around the fort.
Human voices rose high, uttering cries of victory and welcome. The fortress
gates opened and closed with a crash, while the ground shook with clipclopping horse-hooves and stomping elephants.
Vandhiyathevan was quick to notice the change in Nandhini; obviously, the
sounds had attracted her attention. As if to add to it, the maid guarding the
entrance stood up, startled, and tiptoed up to her. “Amma, it looks like
Yejamaan has returned—”
“I know—return to your place.”
Nandhini turned her attention to Vandhiyathevan, once again. “The
Dhanadhikari has entered Thanjai, apparently. He will seek an audience
with the Emperor, ask after his health, confer with the Commander, and
arrive here, straightaway. You must leave before he does. Now—what
message from Azhwarkkadiyaar?”
“Ammani, that staunch Vaishnavite claims that you're his sister,”
Vandhiyathevan opened his gambit. “Is that true?”
“You doubt it, do you? Why?”
“How on earth could anyone believe that a beautiful parrot and a hideous
monkey were born to the same mother?”
Nandhini laughed gently. “He's right in a way—we did grow up together, a
part of the same family. He was as affectionate to me as if I were his very
own younger sister. A pity that I have been such a disappointment to him!”
“Oh well, in that case—well, this is the message he wished me to deliver:
that Krishna Bhagavan awaits you. The Veera Vaishnavites of this world

still wish, with great eagerness and piety, to see the glorious sight of you
wed Lord Kannan.”
“Hasn't he given up that particular fantasy yet?” Nandhini heaved a deep
sigh. “If you ever happen to see him again, kindly tell him this from me: I
am not worthy enough for a fate such as the devout Andal, who married the
Lord himself. Ask him to tear out all memories of me from his heart.”
“That, I won't accept for a moment, my lady.”
“What won't you accept?”
“That you are not worthy of Andal's destiny. That poor girl had to sing,
dance, tie up various flowers into fragrant garlands, weep floods of tears
and practically beseech God to marry her, but that won't be the case with
you. All Krishna Bhagavan has to do is set eyes on your lovely face, and
he'd give up his wives Rukmini and Sathya Bhama, beloved Radhai,
abandon all the Gopika women he usually runs behind—and lift you
straight up and place you on their thrones!”
“Ayya, you seem an adept at mukasthuthi,” Nandhini peeped up at him.
“I'm afraid I don't really favour such tactics.”
“Kindly enlighten me about the meaning of the word mukasthuthi,
Ammani.”
“Flattering someone straight to their face, of course.”
“In that case, turn around and sit with your back to me, please.”
“Whatever for?”
“I shall then be able to flatter your back, won't I? Surely there's nothing
untoward about expressing appreciation that way.”
“You're uncommonly clever with your words.”
“Now who's adept at mukasthuthi?”
“Why don't you turn around and show your back to me, as well?”
“Be it a battlefield or in the company of fair women, my queen,”
Vandhiyathevan said, grandiloquently. “I make it a point to never show
them my back. You may flatter me to my face, by all means.”

Nandhini went into a merry peal of laughter. “Say what you will, but you
are a magician. Do you know how long it's been since I laughed aloud?”
“A very dangerous thing to do, however, my lady—making you laugh
aloud, I mean. Lotuses bloom in laughter in their ponds—and bees fall
unconscious at their beauty!”
“Not just a magician then. You're a poet too, are you?”
“Praises don't flatter me; insults don't faze me either.”
“Insult?”
“You called me a poet just now, didn't you?”
“What of it?”
“I've been called monkey-face, when I was a boy. Today is the first I've been
called so, after a long time, and by your coral lips, no less.”
“They called you that? And who were these wonderful wits?”
“Never mind. None of them are alive, now.”
“Be that as it may—I'm not one of them. All I meant was that you seemed
able to sing verses quite well.”
“I do possess some little ability in that direction, I confess—but only
against my enemies, my lady. That they may die through my word, if they
cannot embrace death with my sword!”
“Great Lion among Lesser Poets! You haven't told me your name, yet.”
“My own name is Vandhiyathevan. Vallavarayan happens to be my title.”
“Of royal descent, then?”
“None other than the hoary old dynasty of the royal Vaanar clan, my lady.”
“And what of your kingdom, now?”
“The sky above; earth below. Today, you see, my lady, I am an Eka
Chakradhipathi—sole Emperor of the whole world and all that I survey.”
Nandhini spent a few moments, subjecting Vandhiyathevan to a careful
scrutiny. “Not quite an impossible task, after all,” she said, finally. “You
could recover your ancestral lands, you know.”

“But how can that be? Surely there's no way of regaining anything that's
vanished into the stomach of a tiger? They're all part of the Chozha empire,
aren't they?”
“I can, however, make it possible for you to retrieve them.”
“Pray do not, Ammani. I've never particularly been enamoured of ruling
kingdoms—but what little ambition I may have cherished vanished
completely, when I saw Emperor Sundara Chozhar, today. To live a life
thus, dependent on others, even for a morsel of food, day after day—I may
as well be an independent man, master of myself, even if I never know
where I am to get my next meal.”
“Precisely my opinion!” exclaimed Nandhini. Then, she seemed to remind
herself of something. “Why, by the way, are Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's men
pursuing you?”
“He entertained grave suspicions upon my person, you see—not unlike your
loyal maid, herself.”
“Indeed? What about?”
“For one thing, how did I come by the palm-tree signet ring?”
The faintest shadow of nervousness flitted across Nandhini's face. “And—
where is it, now?” she asked, in a startled voice.
“Here, my lady. Surely you didn't think I would lose it?” And
Vandhiyathevan showed her the signet ring.
“How did he know that you had it?”
“I'd entertained a great desire to seek an audience with Emperor Sundara
Chozhar, you see—and I used this ring to gain entry into the palace. Later,
of course, the Commander demanded to know how I'd gotten my hands on
it …”
“And your answer?” Her voice revealed her terror.
“Certainly not your name, my lady. Only that Periya Pazhuvettarayar had
given it to me—in Kadambur.”
Nandhini released a deep sigh. Her face and voice seemed to lose some of
her panic. “Did he believe you, do you think?”

“Not fully, I suppose—else, why should he send his men after me? Perhaps
he wished to produce me in front of Periya Pazhuvettarayar, and see if he
could wring the truth that way?”
“You need have no fears about Periya Pazhuvettarayar,” Nandhini smiled a
little. “I shall see to it that he doesn't make a meal out of you.”
“Your ladyship's influence over the Lord of the Chozha Treasury is
renowned all over the world, Ammani—but I have a great many urgent
tasks to accomplish outside this fort, which is why I crave your indulgence,
in helping me escape.”
“Urgent tasks, you say? What sort?”
“Too many to list them all, my lady. Conveying your answer to
Azhwarkkadiyaar, for instance. What may I tell him?”
“To forget that he ever had a sister named Nandhini.”
“I could tell him that, I suppose—not that it would be possible.”
“What wouldn't be?”
“Forgetting you, of course. I've only seen you twice so far, and I would be
hard put to rout you out of my memory. How do you expect a man who's
known you all your life to do the same?”
Subtle shades of triumph blossomed across Nandhini's fair countenance.
She cast her exquisite eyes on Vandhiyathevan's face, the sharp gaze
spearing his heart like a lance.
“Any why, pray, were you so eager to seek an audience with the Emperor?”
“Who wouldn't wish to see for himself a man who is famed for his looks? I
have heard of kings who desired, more than anything, to be the greatest in
courage and nobility, to expand their empires and fame; they ask for their
subjects to desire the same. And yet, do you know what the Buddhist monks
pray for, at the feet of Lord Buddha, when it comes to Sundara Chozha?
“… Sundara
Chozhar vanmaiyum vanappum
Thinmaiyum ulakir sirandhu vaazhkenave!”

Vanappu! Beauty, you see. Naturally, I wished to see the king who is
praised as much for his looks, as for his valour and strength, this
Manmadhan of the Kali Yugam, for myself. It has been my ambition for
many months, now.”
“Indeed; the Chakravarthy is a very vain man. And his precious daughter is
even more conceited—”
“His daughter? Who would that be?”
“That supercilious, arrogant little idiot who lives in Pazhaiyarai—Ilaiya
Piratti Kundhavai Devi, I mean.”
Vandhiyatheva, you lucky wretch, murmured the young man to himself.
Here is the ruse you sought, manifesting itself before your very eyes. Use it
wisely and well, my man.
Hitherto, Nandhini had been reclining on her couch, the very embodiment
of languid grace. Now, suddenly, she sat up straight. “Ayya, here's a
proposal of mine. Will you agree to it?”
“Pray tell me, Ammani.”
“Let us make a pact, if you will: aid me and in turn, I will assist you. What
do you say?”
“My lady—you're the queen of the Dhanadhikari of the Chozha empire,
who happens to be one of the most powerful personages in the land. There's
nothing in this country that you cannot accomplish. I, on the other hand,
possess not the slightest bit of influence. How would it be possible for me
to aid you in any way?”
Wondering if these words were heartfelt or mere lip-service paid by a
talented courtier, Nandhini trained the power of her lovely eyes on him,
searching, it seemed, right into his very heart.
Vandhiyathevan gazed right back at her, not fazed in the least.
“I find myself in sore need of a trustworthy aide. A loyal and dedicated
man. If I were to procure you employment in this palace—would you
accept?”
“I'm afraid I've accepted the very same commission for yet another lady. If
she refuses my services, for some reason, then I shall be delighted to offer

them to you.”
“Another woman? Who on earth is she, that she dares to compete with me?”
“The one that you addressed with such fondness, a few moments ago: Ilaiya
Piratti Kundhavai Devi.”
“Impossible—lies, lies, all of it! It can't be—I won't believe it. You're
playing some sort of joke on me —!”
“My queen, so many people have confiscated this olai and read it that it
can't make any difference if you do, as well.” And Vandhiyathevan
proffered the palm-leaf Aditha Karikalan had written to Kundhavai.
Nandhini took the olai, held it under the lamp and read the contents without
a word. As she finished, eyes flashing lightning shot sparks of sheer wrath
that, to Vandhiyathevan, resembled a ferocious cobra's forked tongue,
slithering through its fangs. Despite himself, he shivered.
“Ayya,” she turned to the young man, face and form suddenly full of
majesty. “You wish to escape this fort with your life intact, don't you?”
“Yes, Amma. Which is why I seek your gracious assistance.”
“Perhaps—but on one condition.”
“Pray tell me.”
“Deliver your olai to Kundhavai—but her reply, whatever that might be,
must be delivered to me. Do you agree?”
“A very dangerous stipulation, my lady.”
“You prided yourself on never being afraid of peril just a while ago, didn't
you?”
“True—but then, running headlong into danger must entail some sort of
reward, mustn't it?”
“Reward? So, you wish for an incentive, do you? You'll certainly get one.
The prize that you might never have conjured up, not in your wildest
dreams. The reward that even Periya Pazhuvettarayar, the most powerful
man in the Chozha empire, has awaited desperately for years—performed a
veritable penance in fact, but to no avail. Should you choose to accept this
commission, such a remuneration will be—yours.” And Nandhini fixed her

exquisite eyes upon him again, her limpid gaze carrying every promise of
breathless romance; employing the divine mohanastram, calculated to fell
any man worth the title with devastating effect.
Poor Vandhiyathevan stood rooted in front of her, dizzy beyond
comprehension. Be still, my heart—be strong, he mumbled to himself,
disjointedly. Do not forget yourself—or take leave of your senses!
And, as though to lend him assistance when he most needed it, an owl
hooted just at that moment, in its most hideous voice.
Once—twice—thrice—the hoots came, regularly.
The hairs rose up on Vandhiyathevan's body. His skin prickled.
Nandhini gazed at the garden beyond, in the direction of the hoots. “It looks
like the real magician has arrived,” she murmured. Then, she turned to
Vandhiyathevan again. “Not that I need his services anymore—but I shall
speak to him anyway. Who knows? He may aid you in your escape,
somehow. Now, follow my instructions, and conceal yourself in the
darkness.”
And she pointed in the direction exactly opposite the one her maid was
stationed in.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 36

“Do you remember?”
Nandhini walked to where the latha mandapam opened out to the garden,
and clapped her hands thrice.
Darkness flitted across her face—but was it stark, naked fear, or merely the
gloom of trees that cast long shadows in the moonlight? It was impossible
to tell.
Ancient, large tree trunks and creepers wounding tendrils around them
could be seen for a little distance, from the mandapam. Beyond, the garden
was a large blob of deep darkness.
The magician appeared from behind a tree, cleaving through the pitch
blackness, pushing away masses of plants and creepers.
Nandhini returned to her saprakooda couch and reclined gracefully upon it,
her beautiful face now clothed in tranquility.
The magician entered the mandapam; the lamp's golden light fell full on his
face.
Ah, familiar features, these—where have we seen him, before? Why, he
appears to be one of the men who had gathered by the Thiruppurambiyam
monument at midnight; who had shaken out a bagful of gold coins. The one
who had growled out, “Kill Azhwarkkadiyaan the instant you set eyes on
him!” Indeed, this was Ravidasan.
The man seemed to be simmering with wrath even as he walked in; the
moment he set eyes on Nandhini, who lay on her couch, looking the very
epitome of serenity, his cat-like eyes seemed to well-nigh explode with fury.
He took his seat on a convenient manai opposite, and glared at her. “Hroom
—hreem—hraam!” He muttered a few chants. “Bhagavathy—Sakti—
Chandikeswari—!” he bellowed.

“Enough! My stupid maid has fallen asleep at her post, I suppose. Say what
you wish to at once!” snapped Nandhini. “He has entered the fort.”
“Why, you wretch!” Ravidasan hissed, very like a ferocious snake.
“Who?” asked Nandhini, calmly.
“You, you ingrate! Devious, wretched Nandhini, who remembers nothing—
the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani, most ungrateful of women! You sly, scheming
little witch!” And Ravidasan pointed an accusing finger at her.
Nandhini stayed silent.
“You appear to have forgotten quite a few things that ought to have been
etched in your memory, woman,” continued Ravidasan. “I shall take it upon
myself to recall them.”
“What's the point of raking up those old stories, now?”
“Why, you ask me? I shall tell you—once I have finished.”
As though realizing the futility in stopping him, Nandhini heaved a much
put-upon sigh and turned away.
“Listen, Rani! Three years ago, in the cremation ground on the banks of the
river Vaigai, burnt a funeral pyre. It was midnight, and none of the
customary rituals and rites that usually accompany such a final act were
performed for this one; nor were priests present. Twigs, sticks and dried
leaves were scrounged around from the forest floor, and placed in a heap;
men brought out a corpse that had lain concealed behind a tree, and placed
it on the pyre. They lit it, and the fire burnt merrily, catching upon the logs.
That was when a few men dragged you forward, from within the forest's
gloom. Your hands and legs were bound; your mouth was gagged with an
old cloth. Your lovely tresses which you wear now, so elegantly, knotted
and strung with fragrant flowers, were flowing down your back and all over
the ground in a straggly mess. Those who brought you out were prepared to
throw you onto the pyre as well, and burn you alive. “We shall wait until
the fire grows!” swore a man. They left you on the ground for the time
being, while each swore a terrible oath. You might have been unable to
speak, but your eyes and ears were open; you watched and listened for all
you were worth. Once they had finished pledging themselves to their cause,
they approached you—and you, silent and wide-eyed until that time, tried to

use your hands desperately, to sign something. You rolled your eyes around,
wriggled your brows, and one of them saw it. “She seems to want to say
something,” he pointed out. “Another of her old stories, I expect. Throw her
into the fire!” snapped another. “No, let's listen to what she has to say,
before we burn her. Remove her gag,” ordered a man. Since he happened to
be their leader, his men obeyed.” Ravidasan paused. “Do you remember
your words then, woman?”
Nandhini answered him not; nether did she turn to acknowledge him.
Disgust and sheer terror painted her lovely face at that moment but also,
along with them, shone a terrible, steely resolve. Two pearly tears trembled
in her limpid eyes.
“So, you do not wish to speak, do you? Fair enough, I shall recite the tale
myself. You, my girl, swore that you would assume the same cause as the
men around you; that you would pledge yourself to exact the same revenge.
This, you argued, was because you had more reason than any of them, to do
so. You would use your beauty and brains, and assist the men however you
could, and renounce your very life the instant your purpose was achieved—
this was what you swore. The others did not believe you, but I did—and I
saved from being burnt to a crisp.” Ravidasan stopped his narrative. “Do
you remember all this—any of it?”
Nandhini turned a little, to glance at him. “Remember? Remember, you
ask? Every word is etched in fire, in my very heart.”
“Later, one day, we were walking in the dense jungle, along the banks of the
broad Kaveri, all of us. Suddenly, we heard the thundering hooves of
cavalry approaching. We decided to split up and hide away in the forest—
but you were the only one to deliberately disregard us. You stood where you
were, and allowed yourself to be captured by those soldiers. Their leader,
Pazhuvettarayan caught sight of you and promptly fell head over heels for
your charms. He wedded you, and I bore the brunt of my comrades' anger—
they believed that you had betrayed us. I resolved to get hold of you alone,
somehow, and I did. I promised myself that I would plunge my trusty knife
in your treacherous heart. But you begged for your life again. You swore
that you were here to carry out your pledge, and that you would lend us
every aid possible from within this very palace. Now—isn't all this true?”
barked Ravidasan. “Isn't it?”

“Why wouldn't it be? Why do you insist on repeating old history again and
again? Tell me what you wish now, and be done with it.”
“No, you do not remember any of those old times—you have forgotten your
past, every single bit of it! You are lost in the luxuries of this Pazhuvoor
palace—you dine at six-flavoured feasts, drape yourself in fine clothes and
expensive jewelry, laze on saprakooda couches and silk mattresses, and
travel around in ivory palanquins! You are a queen now, my lady—how
could ever remember where you came from?”
“Chee! Who cares for these silks, mattresses, clothes and ornaments? Do
you really think I live for such paltry objects? Not I!”
“Or, perhaps you have fallen for a beautiful face? The charms of some
young idiot who passed you by in an alley? These little romances may have
taken your mind away from a revenge that is far more important, might they
not?”
Startled and a little self-conscious, Nandhini flushed crimson. “Such
nonsense,” she spat, making a swift recovery. “Lies, all of it!”
“Indeed? I intimated you of my arrival today, a good while ago—and yet,
you did not send your maid to receive me at the usual place. Why?”
“I did—but someone else climbed up the ladder meant for you. That silly
maid of mine mistook him for you and led him straight here. How is that
my fault, pray?”
“Who cares? Had I hesitated a moment more at that wall, I might have been
mincemeat. The soldiers pursuing that young idiot of yours were almost
upon me. It was all I could do to escape them—as it was, I had to scramble
into the foliage adjoining this palace garden, and plunge myself into a pond,
holding my breath for god knew how long. And then I made my way here,
dripping wet—”
“Serves you right. You dared suspect me of betrayal, did you? Consider
your sins washed away by a dip in that smelly pond.”
“Woman, answer me this: did you really not lose your wits and heart to that
handsome young man?”
“Good heavens, what a horrible idea! Who on earth would ever admire a
man for being handsome? The shameless people of Chozha Nadu might

praise their king for his good looks, but a man's true beauty lies in his battle
scars, doesn't it?”
“Well said—but if this is what you truly believe, what was that young man
doing here?”
“I've told you; Vasuki mistook him for you, and led him here.”
“You even gave him your signet-ring—a favour you would not extend me.
Why?”
“To lure him here, of course. I wished to speak with him. Now that I have, I
shall retrieve it—”
“You did, did you? Why? What were you two lovebirds cooing about, all
this time?”
“I was cooing, as you put it, with a very important purpose in mind. He will
prove useful to our cause, you'll see.”
“You little witch! Proven yourself to be the stupid woman you are, have
you? Betrayed us and our sacred cause to some silly boy we do not even
know—”
“Cease your foolish ravings. Why do you screech so? I betrayed nothing. If
anything, I learnt a great deal from him.”
“And what would that be?”
“He carries an olai from Kanchi to Pazhaiyarai, to the tigress who resides
there. He showed it to me, too. I was instructing him to bring her reply to
me—which was when you barged in.”
“Damn your palm-leaves and writing tools! What earthly use are such
things to us?”
“That's all you know. We've all sworn an oath to destroy those tigers by
their very toots, but all you think of are the males; you forget that a dynasty
may continue through its women as well. And that's not all: who do you
think holds the reins of Chozha Nadu, now? A pathetic Emperor who is
paralyzed and stays in his bed all day? Or the princes in Kanchi and
Ilankai?”

“That would be the man who has the honour to call you his wife;
Dhanadhikari Pazhuvettarayar, of course. The whole world knows this!”
“Wrong again. Certainly the world thinks so; why, even that batty old man
entertains such foolish notions. I'm not surprised that you've been fooled
into believing it as well. In truth, it's that little tigress at Pazhaiyarai who
rules the land with an iron hand. She sits in her pretty little palace, pulling
the strings like a master puppeteer, and everyone dances to her whims and
fancies. There seems to be no one who will put her down—but I will make
sure she learns her lesson. And that's why I put that young man to good
use.”
Ravidasan considered her, a hint of surprise and grudging respect in his
eyes. “Cunning, aren't you? How do I trust you, though? Where is the proof
that all this isn't just a convenient lie, made up for my benefit?”
“I shall surrender that young man to you; lead him out of this fort through
the secret passage. Make sure you blindfold him before you do. Wait in the
vicinity of Pazhaiyarai, and make sure he brings Kundhavai's reply to me,
without fail. Should he try to deceive you or escape, you have my
permission to kill him.”
“Not on my life. You and he may go to hell for all I care! Chinna
Pazhuvettarayar's men are seeking him within the city even as we speak;
they will expand their search outside the fort in a while. Team him with me
and I shall be sure to be caught along with him. No—let us just discuss the
purpose of my visit here.”
“Which you haven't revealed, yet, I might add.”
“We have decided on the men who will journey to Kanchi and Ilankai. Of
course, things will be difficult for those who leave for the island; they will
have to exercise extreme caution and cunning—”
“How am I a part of these problems? Don't tell me you need more money?
Good grief, is there no limit to your ceaseless greed for gold?”
“We require it in such vast quantities for our cause and not for ourselves, as
you well know. Why else do you think we have left you here, whole and
well? The men we are sending to Ilankai will need coins of the island's
currency; Chozha coins will not serve their purpose—”

“All this prevarication for such an ordinary request! I have your precious
gold coins all ready, as you can see.” Nandhini bent down, pulled out a bag
from underneath her couch, and handed it to Ravidasan. “This bag contains
all the Ilankai coins you need—now leave! He'll be here soon.”
She stopped him, as Ravidasan prepared to leave. “Wait a moment—at least
escort that young man outside the fort. He may seek his path however he
may. I have no great desire to show him the secret passage.” She rose on the
words and glanced towards the darkened palace.
It lay wreathed in inky blackness, and nothing was visible. Nandhini signed
with her fingers and clapped her hands lightly, to no effect.
She and Ravidasan walked along the latha mandapam, following the
passage that connected the gallery to the gloomy mansion, towards its
entrance. There was no one to be found, not in all the four directions.
Vandhiyathevan had, quite simply, vanished.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 37

The Clash of Lions
The good people of Thanjaipuri cherished a wholesome, somewhat unique
regard for the Pazhuvoor brothers. Hadn't it been those great lords, after all,
who had brought their old city new lustre and welcome pride?
It is only natural that a procession of elephants, horses, palanquins and even
the odd camel or two attracts a great deal of attention; people throng to see
such events, gape at the opulence and drink in the festivities. Small matter,
then, that Thanjai's residents accorded the same degree of importance every
time Periya Pazhuvettarayar entered or exited the fort; they ranged
themselves on the sides of the roads, raising chants of victory, shouting out
blessings; showering the entourage with flowers and puffed rice.
It was also the norm for Chinna Pazhuvettarayar to arrive at the fortress
gates and welcome his brother, whenever the latter returned home after a
visit.
Their embrace, once they set eyes on each other, was a sight that inspired
majesty and devotion, as though the very Nilagiri and Podhigai hills were
clasping each other—such was their stature and splendour. As for the times
they set off in procession together, through the wide avenues of the city,
each on their respective elephants or horses—ah, one needed ten thousand
eyes to digest the magnificence of such a picture.
Some considered them equal to the asura siblings, Hiranyan and
Hiranyakshan; others were prone to call them Sundhobha Sundhars. There
were those who swore that the affection that existed between them was not
unlike the relationship between those epic heroes, Raman and Bharathan,
while still others considered them warrior brothers equal to Mahabharata's
Veeman and Archunan.

Today however, matters were vastly different: neither Periya
Pazhuvettarayar's grand entrance, nor the suitably pompous performance
delivered by his faithful entourage, served to stir up any excitement. The
streets remained devoid of delighted welcome; not many people were
present, for that matter. Even more important: Chinna Pazhuvettarayar was
conspicuous, by his absence.
Periya Pazhuvettarayar, however, chose to disregard this flouting of
convention, and departed straight to his younger brother's mansion.
Thanjai's Commander must have been unavoidably detained by something
important; else he would not have chosen to be absent. Perhaps the
Chakravarthy's health had taken a turn for the worse—or perhaps—perhaps
a certain significant event had finally happened?
Plagued by all these and more doubts, Periya Pazhuvettarayar's impressive
retinue reached the Commander's palace far sooner than usual.
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar arrived at the entrance to welcome his elder, his
face plainly shrouded with worry and anxiety. He bowed respectfully; the
brothers embraced. Then, they entered the palace—and made for the
Mandhiralosanai chambers, meant for supremely confidential council.
Once in private, the elder came straight to the point. “Kalanthaka, you do
not seem to be your cheerful self, thambi. Has something occurred—is it
the Emperor? He is well, is he not?”
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar, whose given name this was, nodded. “As much as
he ever is, I suppose. Neither terribly ill, nor well.”
“Why do you seem ill at ease, then? I did not receive your customary
welcome at the gates—and the city seems less enthusiastic than usual.”
“Something has occurred, Anna—a very insignificant event, I must admit.
But more of that, later—what about your own affairs?”
“A complete success, of course. Every single one of the invited guests
arrived at Kadambur; all agreed unanimously that your son-in-law
Madhuranthakan deserved to be the successor to the Chozha throne. Raised
the very roof with victory chants, I must say. And if those in question will
not listen to reason, your royal champions are very willing to raise a sword
and fight for our cause. Witness the sight: even Kolli Mazhavan and
Vanangamudi Munaiyaraiyar submitted completely to our decision—what

more could we possibly need? As for Sambuvaraiyar, that man is eager to
put his men, fortress, ramparts and wealth at our disposal, if it will aid our
mission; his own son Kandamaran is straining at the leash, frankly. Who
cares about the mid-lands and Thirumunaippaadi, when we have all of
Chozha Nadu within our grasp? What else need we worry about, pray? The
only objection, if any, might arrive from Pallavan Parthibendran,
Thirukkovilur Malayaman and Kodumbalur Velan—and of these three, the
last is in Ilankai, and poses no threat. What could the other two possibly do?
Turn the whole world on its feet? All that is required, now, is to confront the
Emperor soon and be done with it.”
“Excellent—as far as the lords are concerned. What of the people, though?”
Chinna Pazhuvettarayar drew out. “If they should object —?”
“The people? Good god, what of them? Since when have royal affairs ever
involved the subjects of the land? Should they ever be so presumptuous as
to interfere in such things, it is our sacred duty to crush their impertinence. I
do not, however, anticipate an uprising. All that needs to be said is that the
Emperor desires Madhuranthakan as his heir—and that will shut the people
up. They might be stirred into protests, I admit, were Arulmozhi Varman
here, but fortunately, the boy is in Ilankai and unlikely to wreck our plans.
And our beloved people do not harbour the same amount of affection for
Aditha Karikalan, as you well know. As for your son-in-law, it would be an
easy matter to gain him their loyalty: he has already made a name for
himself as a devout young man with plenty of character—and do we not
know that he is blessed with a countenance fairer than both of Sundara
Chozhar's precious sons? Those learned idiots who always shriek about
“handsome is as handsome does,” would be sure to sing his praises. I
should be amazed, I will admit, if I did not hear “Long live Emperor
Madhuranthakar!” from all quarters, soon enough. No matter—surely there
is nothing for you to fear as long as I am by your side?”
“Yes—but what about the Velakkara Regiment? How do we counter them?”
“Those warriors may have sworn a blood oath to protect Sundara Chozhar's
sacred person, but not his sons, surely? And even if they should object, for
some strange reason, your fortress battalion can break them, can't they?
Drag the whole lot in a naazhigai and stuff them down the dungeons, I say.”

“Pazhaiyarai is likely to pose the biggest threat by far, Anna. Who knows
what sort of a terrible strategy that old hag and young demon might hatch,
between them? We must bend our energies in destroying those, surely—?”
“Thambi—you aren't insinuating, I hope, that I must exercise more caution
over two weak, defenseless women, than hardened warriors? What earthly
havoc could they wreck? And if they should happen to drum up something,
I possess more than enough trickery and magic to counter them, never fear.”
“The Emperor has commanded both his sons to return to Thanjai—”
“Aditha Karikalan certainly won't. Arulmozhi Varman might give some
credence to his father's command, perhaps—in which case we must make
sure to stop him, using force if necessary. Neither of them must set foot in
Thanjai until we have crowned Madhuranthakan the Crown Prince and set
him on the Chozha throne, complete with every authority and power due to
that position, if then. However, you may leave all these to my care. Now, to
return to your concerns—what was this insignificant issue that worried you
so much?”
“There was this young man who arrived from Kanchi, bringing palm-leaves
to the Emperor and Kundhavai—”
“You have confiscated the leaves in question and imprisoned him, I hope?”
“Er, no. He mentioned meeting you in Kadambur—apparently, you
commanded him to hand over the olai to the Emperor. Is that true?”
“Lies, all of it! There was a young man in the Kadambur palace, to be sure;
an uninvited guest who called himself Kandamaran's friend—but the dratted
boy never mentioned an olai of any kind. I mistrusted him, the instant I set
eyes on his cunning face. Surely you did not fall prey to his scheming
ways?”
“I am afraid I did, Anna—only because he mentioned your name.”
“Why, you absolute idiot! What dim-witted blunder did you commit now?
You did not allow that young scoundrel to deliver his olai to the Emperor?
Without even taking a look at it?”
“I did, but it seemed to contain nothing of importance; only a message
asking the Emperor to visit the Golden Palace in Kanchi. That young man,

though—once he had delivered the olai, he went on, saying something
about “danger” …”
“All this, and you did not imprison him even then?”
“No—although I did suspect his motives.”
“What on earth did you do, then?”
“He said he wished to sightsee around Thanjai, and I sent him out with two
escorts. But he gave them the slip and vanished. I was preoccupied with
flushing him out, which was why I could not even come to welcome you
home. I have sent out a warning to the city, as well—”
“Chee! What kind of a brainless idiot falls prey to a boy who is barely a
man, without even a moustache? Fool that I was, I named you Kalanthaka
Kandan, He Who Vanquishes Death; I strove to use every weapon in my
armoury to make you the Commander of the Thanjai fort—ah, how well
you have repaid my efforts! How dare you stand in front of me and admit
that you were made a fool of by a scheming rascal of a boy? You ought to
be ashamed of yourself!”
“It was not just your name that he mentioned; he showed me your signet
ring as well. Did you give it to him?”
“Not on my life. What sort of a bumbling nincompoop did you think I was?
You?”
“That may be, but he did possess the Pazhuvoor signet-ring, and so I will
swear on all that is holy. What is more, he displayed it to the fortress guards
as well, who let him in. If he did not receive it from you—then there is only
one other source he could have gotten it from.”
“And who might that be?”
“Can you truly not guess? I mean the Ilaiya Rani, of course—”
“Careful, boy! Guard your tongue—else I will cut it out, myself!”
“Do, by all means; you have my leave to chop my head off, if you so wish.
But I have every intention of revealing what I have yearned to say, these
many days: a vicious cobra may be a bewitching creature, and you may
have considered it a thing of great beauty when you took it in—but
remember that it will sink its fangs in you. Some day, that snake will ruin us

all! Do not lose yourself to her wily charms, Anna—throw her out, and we
may all be safe!”
“Kalanthaka Kanda—now that you have been so good as to share your
much-vaunted opinions; give me leave to return the favour. I have yearned
to speak my mind as well, and here is what I wish to say: you have my
permission to deliver advice, share your concern; remonstrate with me,
should you find any of my actions questionable. You may do all these—
save criticize the lady who has done me the honour of accepting my hand in
marriage. Speak a word against her, and I shall strangle you with the very
hands that raised you. The slightest accusation, and I shall stab you to death
with the very hand that taught you to wield a sword. Careful, now!”
Those two brothers, famed for their mutual affection, seemed like lions at
that moment, ready to fling themselves at each other's throats; willing to rip
their eyes out. Their war of words rang through the chamber, echoing from
every corner, very like the deafening roar of a ferocious jungle beast. They
might have been supposedly engaging in a private conversation within the
council chambers, but their growling threats permeated through the walls
and to those outside, falling on their startled ears like the roar of distant,
terrifying thunder.
Their entourage awaited their lords' pleasure, quivering outside. What sort
of storm was about to break over their heads, now?
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 38

Nandhini, the Coquette
It was well past midnight and into the third jaamam, when Periya
Pazhuvettarayar finally returned to his own palace.
The west wind whirred through the silent streets, whipping up the fine dust
in dizzying eddies—but the storm raging in his steely heart, whirling with a
furious frenzy, flung up far more than just dirt and filth.
Ah, the things he had said to his beloved brother! He wished he had not
been quite so brutal, now. After all, there was no doubt that his thambi held
him in the greatest esteem, and his accusations—unjust as they were—had
been borne out of great concern and worry. Still, a vastly suspicious fellow,
his brother; why pile these allegations on Nandhini, for pity's sake? The
pitfalls of human nature, which committed grievous blunders and always
sought to escape by making someone else the scapegoat! Such tactics were
always used by weak, spineless cowards—but why must his brother fall
prey to the same pathetic ruse? All this, after having let that rascal of a boy
slip through his fingers too! Then he finds a way to point fingers at his
madhani, his own sister-in-law, and how this could possibly reflect well
upon his courage and personal integrity, was a puzzle he could not fathom.
What sort of a man even indulged in such things?
Well, he had apologized for his unseemly words, at any rate. There was no
point in dwelling upon that conversation, was there?
And yet—could there possibly be an atom of truth to his claims? Had he,
after all, fallen for a pretty young woman at this ripe old age? After all,
hadn't he just addressed the harshest words to one who had fought by his
side, shoulder to shoulder, in a hundred battles; shrugged off mortal danger
to fly to his side, his own younger brother—and all in defense of a girl he
had dragged out from a forest! Was she indeed worthy of such loyalty? He

knew nothing of her origins, after all; her speech and behaviour, it must be
admitted, were peculiar at times.
Chee, how can I let my brother's heedless words influence me so? Unjust
indeed, to suspect Nandhini's motives. Her deep and abiding love for me is
evident in everything she does—witness her mellow speech, and the utmost
respect with which she treats me! As for her wifely duties—was there ever a
woman who showed as much interest in her husband's office as Nandhini?
Why, she even troubles herself enough to offer suggestions and comments,
aiding me in every way possible!
Such petty issues aside—how she must have loved me, to wed a doddering
old man of more than sixty! Devendran himself, king of the Devas, would
fall all over himself to claim the hand of one so beautiful that she inspires
celestial dancers to intense jealousy—as for the kings of this mortal realm,
who might baulk at the good fortune of wedding such a sundari? Ah, the
very Sundara Chozha would have had no two thoughts about it, had she
ever caught his faltering sight! And here I am, suspecting her—ah, how
incredibly unmerited! I have heard tales, of course, of old men who spent
every moment of their lives in hell, entertaining unlawful doubts about their
wives' infidelity; I have laughed at such incidents myself. And yet here I am,
caught in the same terrible toils; making a laughing stock of myself!
Still, it would not hurt to question her about certain issues; there were a few
of her activities that warranted inquiries. She wishes me to grant her my
signet-ring often; to what end? Why does she spend so much time in that
god-forsaken latha mandapam? And what, of course, of that mysterious
magician who visits her at all sorts of odd hours—and which she admitted
to, herself? Why would she need his services anyway? Whose heart does
she wish to conquer, that she must make use of such tactics?
All this aside, there is another, perhaps the most burning of all questions:
how long is she going to keep me away from her side, like a brahmachari
yet to taste the delights of marriage? Every time the subject crops up, she
conceives a fast or ritual that prevents our union—but never, not once, has
she ever explained what exactly the worship entails! Ah, all this does seem
very like the cunning strategies often used by wily women who disliked their
husband's advances! Well, no more of it; I have given way to her whims far

too much. Tonight, all this and more must be discussed and put an end to,
come what may!
Periya Pazhuvettarayar arrived at his palace entrance to a rousing welcome
by his closest aides, servants and maids, but search as he might, swiveling
his eyes in every which direction, the one woman he wished to see above all
else was conspicuous by her absence: the Ilaiya Rani. Upon enquiries, it
was discovered that her ladyship was still in the latha mandapam.
What in the heavens is she doing there, well beyond midnight? A spark of
anger burnt within him. Was his faithful wife playing him for a fool,
perhaps? Had she devised some unique way of ignoring him, the willful
woman?
Periya Pazhuvettarayar hastened towards the gallery, not a little peeved by
what clearly seemed an attempt by his wife to incense her lord and master.
He reached the corridor connecting the palaces in time to see Nandhini
returning, maid in tow. The moment she set eyes on him, she stopped,
choosing to gaze at something—no doubt vastly interesting—in the garden,
shrouded in inky blackness. The maid had stopped at a little distance.
Pazhuvettarayar drew close to the Ilaiya Rani; she continued to fix her
lovely eyes upon the garden, seemingly unaware of his proximity. She
neither acknowledged him, nor deigned to receive him.
Thus it was that Periya Pazhuvettarayar, who had strode forward with every
intention of subjecting Nandhini to a furious diatribe—found that he had to
pacify her.
“Nandhini, my dearest, you seem annoyed. Why will you not look at me,
my love?” And he placed his hand, strong as a Vajrayudham, on her slender
shoulders—gently, it must be said.
His young queen grasped his iron-like arm, and shoved it off her. Ah, could
a limb as soft and delicate as the flowers in his garden possibly possess
such strength?
“You deigned to push me away with your delicate hands! Life could not
bless me any further, my heart's dearest—you have accomplished what no
warrior from the Vindhya hills to Thirikonamalai would have even dared
think of. That, my dear, is my greatest good fortune, but you have not yet
revealed the reason for your anger. Will you not speak to me?” pleaded that

great warrior, veteran of a thousand battlefields. “My wretched ears yearn
for the silken softness of your voice, more exquisite than the sweetest
honey, my heart.”
“How many days has it been, since you left?” demanded Nandhini. “Four—
you've condemned me to four days, alone!” Her lilting voice held just the
slightest hint of a sob—and Pazhuvettarayar, who had wielded a hundred
swords and spears unflinching, found his steely heart melting like wax in a
flame.
“And this is what upsets you, my dear one? You could not bear my absence
for a mere four days? But I might have to leave for the battlefield; we might
have to live apart for months on end—what would you do, then?”
“You believe me to be a cold-hearted wretch who would stay away from
you for months, while you went to war? Perish the thought. I shall follow
you thither, of course, like a shadow at your heels—”
“Here is a jest, indeed! What sort of a war do you think I could wage, with
you by my side? Dearest, many are the injuries this chest has borne; my
shoulders have taken more arrows and spears than can be counted—those
scars number sixty-four, or so, many lavish praises upon me. But you—ah,
if the tiniest thorn were to touch you, my life, then my heart would splinter
into pieces; it would have accomplished what a thousand battles and
weapons have failed to achieve, thus far. How, how could I possibly take
you with me, to battle? I cannot even bear to see you stand all this while, on
these unforgiving stone floors! Come, my queen, pray, do recline upon your
beautiful, flower-laden couch, that I may look upon your exquisite
countenance. Do not think, fair one, that these four days have wrought
anguish upon your spirits alone—for I have suffered as well; every moment
of your absence is an aeon to me. But now—ah, now I may gaze at your
divine radiance until I quench my terrible yearning!” And he clasped her
soft hands, leading her gently to the saprakooda couch.
Nandhini brushed away her tears and glanced up at him. The lamp's gentle
light caught her lovely face, throwing her golden radiance into prominence
—and the ravishing smile that bloomed upon it. The Chozha empire's
Dhanadhikari gazed at her, struck by the pearls that peeped amidst soft,
coral lips. Ah, were they within my grasp, I would sacrifice all three worlds,
just for a hint of this wondrous countenance—but as I lack these

magnificent possessions, I shall have no compunction in placing my body,
soul and worldly assets at her dainty feet. And yet, this celestial maiden
demands nothing of me!
Such were his dizzy thoughts, as he drank in her lovely form. Gone, forever,
was any intention of ever taking her to task, demanding explanations, or
reading her a lecture on appropriate behaviour; he was now willing and
ready to prostrate himself at her feet, and carry out the most trivial task.
Slavery of any kind is demeaning—but there is nothing that denudes a man
of his dignity and senses, as much as the charms of a beautiful woman.
“You've been away from me for four long days—why didn't you come
home at once? Your brother was far more important to you, wasn't he?”
retorted Nandhini, her face bright with mock anger; eyes darting lightning
looks of playfulness.
“Not quite, my dear. I did want to come to you, straight as an arrow and
true. I was detained, however, by that young idiot Madhuranthakan; I had to
make sure he returned safe home, through the secret passage. That was why
I stayed so long at my brother's palace—”
“I cherish the greatest regard for your abilities, Ayya; I am deeply interested
in all your concerns—indeed, I consider myself fortunate to be involved in
any of them. There is nothing I wish more than for you to succeed in your
every endeavour. Yet, I can't help but loathe the fact that a man travelled in
my closed palanquin—and that every man, woman and child believes me to
be a part of your retinue, wherever you go—”
“You do not believe that I welcome such a state of events either, do you?
Never!—and yet, we have undertaken an extremely important task; I shall
have to put up with a great deal for its eventual success. Besides, surely you
have not forgotten that conveying Madhuranthakan in your palanquin was
your idea in the first place? And was it not you who suggested that he use
the secret passage to enter and exit the fort—?”
“I did, and in this, I believe only to have carried out my duty. Isn't it, after
all, the sacred charge of a wife to aid her husband in any way possible? It's
true that I suggested this ruse, but when I think of how it may have acted
against you—”

“But that was not all, was it, my dear? Why, I remember well the
Madhuranthakan of yore—the pathetic boy who smothered himself in
sacred ash and spent hours mumbling Om Namachivaaya, over a string of
rudraksha beads—making endless pilgrimages from one temple to another
—the perfect son to his equally pious mother! I remember too, the
monumental efforts we took to persuade him towards the Chozha throne, all
to no avail. But you spoke to him twice—and he changed his mind in an
instant! You might not believe it, but the lad now dreams of an empire that
stretches from Imayam to the very tip of Ilankai; from the very heavens to
the ends of the earth! Why, he can barely even wait for our efforts to come
to fruition; he would like to ascend the throne this very instant! I do not
know what sort of spell you wove over him, my heart—and speaking of
which, you appear to possess a great many magical tricks up your sleeve
yourself; why do you wish for the services of another? People talk, you see
—”
“—and it is your divine duty to chop off their unruly tongues. I have
confided to you before, of my reasons for consulting a magician; should
you have forgotten, I shall remind you of them again: that petty little snake
in Pazhaiyarai must be taught her lesson. You are men, after all, my lord;
you go to battles and settle your difference like warriors; “Women—such
weak, defenseless creatures!”—that is what you think; war against a woman
is the height of dishonour, to you. And yet, my king, a single woman may
wreak more havoc than a hundred men. A snake knows its own kind; you
know nothing of her, but I know Kundhavai's evil mind like my own. Ah,
the temerity of that witch, to have scorned both you and me! Such things
may have slipped your magnanimous mind, my lord, but it didn't mine.
Never, never shall I forget her cruel words as she addressed me, in the midst
of a hundred women: “I shall never understand why you chose to marry
that doddering old man! He may have lost his mind in his dotage, but what
possessed you to lose yours? Where did your wits go begging?” Ah, how
can I ignore such vicious barbs? “You fairly dazzle our eyes like a celestial
maiden come down to earth,” said Kundhavai. “Any prince would consider
it an honour to claim your hand in marriage, and make you his queen—why
must you choose an ancient, bumbling buffalo for your husband, you poor
girl?” My lord—never shall I forget those malicious words—not until my
last, dying breath!”

And Nandhini began to sob, almost beside herself, after her breathless
exposition. Hot tears coursed down her cheeks, flowing in a deluge and
soaking her heaving bosom.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 39

Spinning Worlds
He had married again at a ripe old age—and a ravishing young woman, at
that. People were bound to gossip, and bandy ribald comments about his
latest escapade. Periya Pazhuvettarayar had not exactly been unaware of the
disparaging remarks that had flown about his nuptials and those who made
them; that Kundhavai Piratti had been one, had come to his attention as
well. No one had, however, made it their business to repeat her exact words
so blatantly—and now that he had them from Nandhini herself,
Pazhuvettarayar's wrath knew no bounds. His heart thudded furiously in his
chest; flames of sheer fury scorched him, like the boiling heat in an
ironsmith's forge. Gup—gup came his heated breaths in shuddering sighs,
finding no other outlet for his burning hatred; Nandhini's hapless tears only
served to rouse him into a towering rage.
“Is that what she said of me, my heart's dearest? Did that wretched witch
truly call me an old buffalo? Well, she shall know my wrath, that little
pest,” he ground out, teeth gnashing. “I shall crush that slender body of hers
like a petty vine under a buffalo's terrible hooves! See if I won't! I shall—I
shall …” he stuttered to a stop, too angry to be coherent, face twisted in
fury; his countenance so harsh it could not bear to be seen.
Nandhini used her considerable charms to calm him down. “Nadha—my
husband, I knew you couldn't bear to see me slighted in any way,” she
spoke in a soothing voice, twining her delicate fingers, soft as the petals of
a flower, with his iron digits. “And yet, how can one ever conceive of a
magnificent lion, trained to splinter an elephant's brawny skull and drink its
blood in a gory battlefield, fighting with a little cat? Kundhavai is just such
a one—a spitting feline. And yet, she's powerful in magic—that's how she
has everyone dancing to her tunes in this Chozha Empire, with her spells
and trickery! There's only one way she can be overpowered, and that's with

magic that will counter her own evil ambitions. Should you object to this,
my lord, all you have to do is tell me,” she sobbed again, “and I shall leave
this palace this very day—”
The flames of fury died down; in their place rose waves of undeniable
passion and ardour. “No, my dearest, pray do not even say such a thing—
you may consort with a thousand magicians if you so wish, but do not
leave, my heart! You are as life to me—nay, you are my very life! And
what would this pitiful body be, devoid of your life-giving love, my
beloved one? Ah, my spirit burns every moment I am away from you, every
time your fasts and rituals force us apart. I die even as I am alive, my heart.
Tell me, my love, how may I gain your affections? You know so many
tricks and spells—will you not grant me one, to please you?”
“But why you need such pathetic aids, Nadha? Pray leave such paltry
devices to me, a feeble woman. Your valiant hands, used to swords, spears
and glorious battle, need never have recourse to such things.”
“Ah, my body thrills at your very voice; when your coral lips address me
“Nadha!” I can hardly bear the exhilaration. Your radiant face strips me of
every semblance of sanity. I carry swords and spears, you say, and must
fight as a warrior, and I do; I destroy my foes with every weapon I possess
—but alas, they are useless to me now! How do I wage battle against
Manmadha, my beloved one, with mere metal? Of what use are my trusty
knives in this pretty latha mandapam? For it is you who possess all the
weapons in this war of hearts. Why do I need tricks and spells, you ask—I
shall tell you: to assuage the terrible fire that consumes my body and soul,
and has done so, for days! Teach me a spell that will slake my thirst, I beg
of you—or grant me the precious boon, my dearest one, of the pleasure of
your intimacy! I give myself to you, heart's delight, but ask only one thing:
release me from this terrible prison; save my life! It is now two years and
more since we were bound together by the holy vows of matrimony—and
yet, we have not begun to live as husband and wife. You describe rituals
and fasts, ceremonies that require you to stay away—and banish me to the
terrible wastes of isolation, to eternal torture that batters my soul. Allow
me, your lawfully wedded husband, by your side or end my torment: poison
me with your own hands—!”

“Ayyayo!” Nandhini covered her ears with her palms. “Pray—pray do not
distress me with such cruel words, or I truly might carry out your wishes—a
few drops of poison and I shall end my life. And then you may be happy,
free of the taint of my existence—”
“Never, my heart, never shall I repeat those hateful words; forgive me, most
beloved one. Live a happy life without you by my side, you say? I am more
than half demented, as it is; with you gone, I shall descend into complete
madness—”
“Forgive me, my lord, but why? I see no need for your anguished existence,
marred by terrible fits of lunacy; why should you? We are bound for an
eternity you see; we became as one, the day we joined in matrimony. We
are now one soul; we possess one spirit, merely constrained by two bodies.
Every beat of your heart echoes in mine; every thought in your
consciousness finds clarity in my being. My soul is but a mirror that reflects
yours. Should your brows gather in a frown, my very soul shudders with
distress; I turn queasy at the faintest twitch of your moustache. With such
unity of thought at the very core of our beings, surely there's no reason to
invest such meaning in a pitiful body—a carcass that, moreover, will rot
and die, some day; that will burn to cinders and turn to dust—”
“Stop—cease at once—my ears blister at your cruel words!” Periya
Pazhuvettarayar cried out, and continued breathlessly, before Nandhini
could speak. “A pitiful body, you say? A carcass that might rot and burn?
Do not—do not utter such terrible words; let your coral lips and honeyed
voice never resort to such malicious speech. A mortal body, fated to turn to
dust—is that what you truly think you are? Never, my life, never. The world
has seen the birth of thousands of women; a hundred thousand still live
upon its surface—and Brahmadevan may well have made them of mud,
stone, or even lime; moulded their ugly forms with coal and soot. But you
—ah, do you even know how he gave shape to your wondrous form, my
heart? He chose the most fragrant of the mandhara flowers that lay strewn
on the ground, in Devalokham, the abode of the Devas; he came down to
Thamizhagam next, and gathered charming red lotuses; he then returned to
his celestial abode and placed those sweet blooms in a precious bowl of
divine ambrosia. He waited until nectar and blossoms blended into a
glorious concoction; then, he added pearly, radiant moonbeams; came down
to earth, and asked for the melodies of generations of paanar musicians.

They played upon the beauteous yaazh, which Brahman added, as well.
And this was the magnificent blend that he eventually used, to mould your
divine beauty—”
“You speak as though you were by Brahma's side while he gave shape to
my form, Nadha. Pray, why am I to be the subject of such overwhelming
praise? Many are the wonderful ladies who occupy your anthappuram;
gently bred princesses, with whom you've led a wedded life for many long
years. I on the other hand, have had the pleasure of your acquaintance for
little more than two—”
“Nandhini!” Pazhuvettarayar cut in, before she could continue. His heart
churned with emotions that threatened to overpower him; perhaps he
wished to seek relief by speaking of them, and thus releasing some of it.
Roaring flames almost engulfed his soul; he wished, perchance, to quench
them with a shower of words. “Ah, you speak of the many women in my
anthappuram—the ancient Pazhuvoor clan depended upon my marriage for
its future; I believed it to be my sacred duty to marry them. Some of those
idiots turned out to be barren; others bore me only girls. If this was God's
will, then so be it, I reflected, and made peace with my lot in life. I gave up
the very thought of women and pleasure, choosing, instead to devote all my
time to royal affairs. Chozha Nadu deserved all my attention, I believed;
nothing and no one else commanded so much of my heart. It was at this
time that we fought our final, decisive battle against the Pandiyas. Many
were the commanders who were at their prime, young men yearning to
wage war; yet, I could not find it in me to stay away from the battlefield. In
the end, my presence did serve an excellent purpose; such a magnificent
victory might not have been ours, otherwise. Once I had decimated the
Pandiya forces and raised the glorious Chozha flag in Madurai, I journeyed
towards the Kongu country. I was returning, making my way along the wide
banks of the Kaveri—when I first saw you, in the midst of dense jungle.
“I could scarce believe my eyes. I closed, and then opened them again—but
there you were, still on the forest path. Surely this is a forest nymph; she
will disappear when I approach her, I thought, as I stepped forward. You,
however, did not. I wondered if you were some sort of an angel, like those
mentioned in our puranams, a celestial being cursed to fall from heaven,
and walk this earth—certainly, you could not be a lowly human being; nor

know the human tongue. I came even closer, and asked, Who are you,
woman?
“When you replied, it was in perfect Thamizh: I am an orphan, my lord; I
offer myself up to your gracious protection; grant me refuge! I took you up
in palanquin at once, I admit—and in those moments, my heart began to
race with thoughts I had never given reign to, in all my life.
“It seemed to me that I had seen you before, somehow, somewhere—but try
as I might, I could not remember where. And then suddenly, a veil lifted in
my mind's eye, revealing the truth. It was not in this birth that I had met
you, you see, but in many others, before this. Those memories now came
flooding into my heart, like a veritable deluge! Once, you were born as the
beautiful Akalikai; I was Devendran, king of the Devas, and I came down to
earth in search of you, braving even the most ferocious curses of your
husband, a sage; Then, I was the Maharaja Santhanu, hunting along the
forest paths—and I stumbled upon you, a beauteous maiden; you were the
revered River Ganga, of course, and had taken human form and I fell in
love with you; yet another time, I found myself re-incarnated as the
merchant Kovalan in the city of Kaviripoompattinam and you were the
faithful, loyal Kannaki; I lost my mind for a while, caught in the wily
illusions of this sickening world and forgot you—but the fates were kind to
me again; the veil lifted, and memories of you returned; I took you to
Madurai; left you safe in Ayarkudi, while I went to the markets to sell your
silambu ornament for money—there, betrayal cost me my life. And that is
why I was born again, as a warrior in a Chozha clan, that I might take my
revenge against those traitorous Pandiya kings—and I promptly did so,
when I chopped off Veera Pandiyan's head. I destroyed his wretched clan
and was on my way home—when I caught sight of you. And that was when
I knew, my dearest, that I had met my mate, my beloved Kannaki, whom I
lost all those centuries ago —!”
Nandhini had sat with her face slightly averted, through all of Periya
Pazhuvettarayar's fanciful ramblings about his various incarnations; her lord
and master had not had the opportunity to see the plethora of expressions
flitting across his wife's face. In this, it must be admitted, he was fortunate.
Had he done so, it is doubtful if he might have continued with his fairytales, spanning across aeons.

“I'm not sure if your examples are all that appropriate, Nadha,” Nandhini
turned to him, when he finally paused to take a breath. “You see, they all
appear to be a little too inauspicious for my taste. Let's just say that you are
the very incarnation of Manmadhan; I'm Rathi, and be done with it.” Her
face blossomed into a happy smile.
Pazhuvettarayar's countenance brightened as well; pride and delight fought
for supremacy in his eyes. A man might be hideous in the extreme—but
surely even he would be exhilarated, when described as “handsome” by the
woman he loves? Periya Pazhuvettarayar could not help preening himself
either, at Nandhini's lavish praise. “You are entirely justified in calling
yourself Rathi, my beloved, but it would hardly be appropriate to call me a
god of love now, would it?” he demurred, as though the very thought was
repugnant to him. “Your love for me prompts you to admire me so, I am
sure.”
“Nadha, I beg to disagree. To me, you are Manmadhan—a warrior's good
looks lie in his battle prowess, after all, and there's not a single man in all of
the southern lands to match your valour. All the world knows this. And
then, there's also the fact that a true man always aids damsels in distress—
and I am the best example of that, as you can well see. You knew not my
name, my caste, clan or whereabouts; yet your heart was magnanimous
enough to grant this orphan a refuge. To this day, I have known nothing but
comfort; you have showered endless affection upon me, a hapless girl.
Know this—I shall not make you, my lord and master, wait for very long.
My fasts are almost at an end—”
“My heart's delight—pray do tell me what these precious rituals are, that I
may do all in my power to complete them as quickly as I can, for your
sake,” begged the Pazhuvoor king.
“None of the descendents of that vainglorious Sundara Chozha, who
believes himself to be the handsomest man on earth, must ascend the
Chozha throne. Kundhavai, that conceited, arrogant woman, must be taught
a sharp lesson; her pride must be destroyed—”
“Consider these tasks done, Nandhini. The lords and kings of the Empire
are agreed that Adhithan and Arulmozhi Varman will not ascend to the
throne in Thanjai; Madhuranthakan will be Sundara Chozha's heir—”

“All of them?” Nandhini demanded, stressing the word. “Truly?”
“Well—barring two or three, the rest certainly have. Malayaman, the
Kodumbalur Velir and Parthibendran will not comply, of course, but no
matter; they are of no account—”
“Be that as it may—it behooves us to exercise the greatest caution until our
task is done, isn't it?”
“Indeed it does and I, for one, have made sure that all possible precautions
are taken. If at all there is a mishap, it is not mine, but another's. Why,
something of that sort happened even today, I hear: a young rascal from
Kanchi gave Kalanthakan the slip, and delivered an olai to the Emperor
himself—”
“Ah—and here you've been singing your precious brother's praises all this
while! Haven't I told you, time and again, that he is sorely lacking?”
“In this case, perhaps, yes. He alleges, besides, that the boy even showed
him our signet ring.”
“Excuses, excuses—always supplied to cover up failures. And so—was
nothing done to capture this young man?”
“Why not? Our men have flung their nets out both within this fort and
without; the hunt is on. He is sure to be ensnared soon enough. I assure you,
my dear: our mission is unlikely to be compromised by any of this idiot's
machinations. Madhuranthakan will ascend the throne, upon Sundara
Chozha's death—”
“Nadha—I believe it's almost time to finally reveal the purpose of my
penance …”
“That, my dearest, is what I have been imploring you to do, for quite a
while.”
“All my fasts, rituals and sacrifices will serve no purpose, should
Madhuranthakan—that young idiot who leers at women—ascend the throne
…”
“What else, then? Come, reveal your heart's desire, and I shall make sure it
is done.”

“When I was very young, my king, a famous astrologer took a look at my
birth-chart. He prophesied that I would suffer a great many ills until I was
eighteen—”
“And? What else?”
“—but once I crossed this year, my stars would change. The planets would
re-align themselves. I would ascend great heights of prosperity, and occupy
a magnificent position—”
“And he was right. Who is this wonderful astrologer? Tell me, that I may
perform a kanakabishekam, shower him with gold coins at once!”
“Nadha?”
“My heart?”
“The astrologer mentioned one other thing. May I disclose that, as well?”
“Certainly, my dear. I insist upon it!”
“He prophesied that my husband, the man who claimed my hand in
marriage, would wear a glittering crown and ascend a throne fit for an
Emperor among Emperors; he would be the magnificent ruler of an Empire
that claimed the unwavering allegiance of all fifty-six kings of our land.
You will fulfill that prophecy too, won't you, my liege?”
Pazhuvettarayar gazed at her, perplexed beyond belief. Nandhini and the
beautiful saprakooda couch she reclined on began to weave, in front of his
dazed eyes. The latha mandapam, its pillars, and the gloomy garden
opposite began to tilt crazily. The tree-tops, bathed in the pearly light of the
moon, began to whirl around; the stars in the night sky and the palaces in
either side swiveled dangerously.
The whole world spun.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 40

The Palace of Gloom
Meanwhile, what of Vandhiyathevan, who vanished without a trace?
We saw in the beginning, that he shielded himself within the inky gloom of
the dark palace. For a few moments, he strained to listen to Nandhini's
conversation with the magician—but not a word could he hear, much to his
disappointment. Not that this concerned him too much. Involved as he had
been in talking to Nandhini, he had not failed to sense his faculties
deserting him; a certain drowsy acquiescence wending its way through his
mind, almost drugging him into obeisance. He knew it for what it was, now:
an illusion calculated to make his drop his guard—but this meant that he
could no longer afford to return to Nandhini's presence. No, far better to
leave at once, without laying himself wide open to her charms! The
Pazhuvettarayar brothers were terrible enough, but getting snared in the
Ilaiya Rani's toils was a peril he could not risk. His wits did not desert him
in the presence of those warrior-lords; his shoulders set to combat with a
whim; his hands never strayed far from the dagger at his hip. Wits or war;
he was prepared for both. The young queen, though—ah, his wonderfully
flexible mind deserted him in her presence; her seductive airs robbed him of
any semblance of intelligence, and as for his knife-wielding abilities, the
less said about his nerveless hands, the better. Heaven knew what disaster
might befall him if he ever returned to her.
That magician, besides—what on earth was she doing, hobnobbing with
men of that ilk? What sort of wicked spells did they weave? As for her
hatred towards Kundhavai, good grief—how could he ever forget the way
her eyes fairly glittered with malice at the very mention of her name! Who
knew—Nandhini was quite capable of ignoring their conversation and hand
him back to the tender mercies of Periya Pazhuvettarayar; women were
well-known, after all, for their impulsive natures and brash decisions. Now,

if he could just escape without ever catching her eye—but how? The only
way out was possibly through the garden, and over the wall—and what if
the men pursuing him lay in wait, still? Was there no other way out? At all?
Where have your wits gone begging, Vandhiyatheva? What of your famed
luck that has never deserted you thus far? Think, think now—use those
brains of yours—swivel your eyes around in all four directions—ah, here's
that gloomy palace—and why is it shrouded in such darkness, anyway? Was
there anyone, or anything within? Perhaps a way out, through another
entrance?
Should he enter its gloomy precincts anyway? After all, it might prove
useful at some point, mightn't it?
But how on earth was he ever going to get in? What a massive door, to be
sure—and such a huge lock, too! Ah, the heaviness of these objects, and
such an enormous width—but wait, what was this? A door within a door?
Wonder of wonders—it opens at my touch! Well, what more can I ask for? If
this isn't good fortune, I don't know what else is. Time to enter this
mysterious place and gauge its secrets!
Vandhiyathevan pushed open the tiny door, set so cleverly into the larger
one that it could barely be seen, and stepped into the dark confines of the
palace. His first thought was to make sure than Nandhini never knew his
whereabouts; he pushed the door shut, noiselessly.
As gloomy as the palace already was, this seemed to deepen the darkness
even more. Vaguely, he remembered catching sight of several large stone
pillars in the dim light of the open door—but now, of course, he could not
see a single thing. Ah, such stifling darkness—surely no one could even
imagine such inky blackness—chee! Pull yourself together. Of course it was
pitch black; isn't it always so, when one moves from light into gloom? A
little while here, and his eyes would grow accustomed to the interiors; he
would be able to see the pillars again, dimly, no doubt. Experience had
taught him this—and yet, here he was, frightened at darkness! Ridiculous,
indeed.
I may as well begin walking a little, instead of imitating some of the pillars
I saw, he mused. I shall stretch out my hand and feel my way—one those
blessed columns ought to be here, somewhere –

For a while, Vandhiyathevan stumbled along, hands in front of him, like a
blind man. And found his fingers brushing a pillar, just as he had expected.
Ah, this was a worthy specimen indeed—a magnificent stone column. I
shall simply feel my way around it, he thought, and walked further.
He felt another pillar on his path—but still could not see a single thing, for
some reason. Surely there must be some faint illumination, by now? Had he
suddenly gone blind? No, that was silly!—people did not simply lose their
sight for inexplicable reasons, did they? Well, he would walk further. No, he
encountered no further pillars, but there was a strange feeling of descending
—wait, here is a stair! Thank heaven he hadn't lost his footing and fallen
headlong—but how long was he supposed to stumble along this way,
without a chink of light?
Cold fingers of dread suddenly clamped around Vandhiyathevan's heart. He
really could not take a step more—he would have to return, back to the
latha mandapam. Far better to face Nandhini and accept whatever scheme
she came up with, rather than stagger endlessly in this gloom. It didn't
matter what promise she demanded; he would give it—and then, well,
things were apt to take care of themselves.
With this very creditable intention, Vandhiyathevan retraced his steps—or
tried to, at any rate. Was he truly on the right path? How could he ever
know, in this inky blackness? Nothing barred his path this time; where had
all those enormous pillars gone? Would he never be able to find the
entrance? What if he had to spend the whole night rambling all over this
terrifying palace? Good god, what disaster had he let himself in for —?
Wait—what was that sound? Sadasadasada—it sounded like fluttering
wings. Where was it coming from? Bats, perhaps? Hardly surprising, if so;
those creatures were known to inhabit gloomy, dark places like these—no,
no, these weren't just bat-wings; there was the faint sound of footfalls as
well. Someone was walking around here—but who? Were these men? Or—
or …
Vandhiyathevan's thoughts froze; his tongue cleaved to the roof of his
mouth, which went dry in an instant.
Someone seemed to brush against his face. He gathered all his strength,
swung his hand and sent his fist crashing into it.

His valiant arm ached fit to break; cradling the abused digits,
Vandhiyathevan felt for his presumed attacker—only to see that it was a
formidable stone column. Not only had he almost walked into one of those
huge pillars, but actually tried to engage in battle with it! Vandhiyathevan
might have almost laughed out loud—had his hand not been almost
exploding with pain, that is.
His fears might have receded a little, but he was not free of them
completely.
For he could still hear those terrible footfalls—sometimes they sounded far
off; at others, as though they were coming straight for him.
Vandhiyathevan stood rooted to the ground, listening for all he worth; his
eyes swung around to the direction of the footsteps, and stared hard.
Ah—light! There was light, ahead—getting brighter by the moment—
approaching him! Smoke accompanied the light as well; someone was
arriving with an oil-torch. Was it Nandhini, perhaps, coming in search of
him? That wouldn't be a bad thing—but what if it was someone else? It
would be wise to conceal himself—after all, there was no dearth of hidingplaces here.
The torch glided nearer; by its light, Vandhiyathevan saw that he was in a
vast hall littered with massive stone columns; each had terrifying demons
carved into them. A staircase seemed to climb towards the hall and curve
upwards; the torch-light, he saw, appeared to move up from the base of said
stairs—well, Nandhini was certainly out of the question, then; it could not
be her.
Perhaps—was this, perhaps the way to the famed dungeons of Thanjai that
he had heard so much about? Did it exist under this very palace? Was one
of its infamous residents coming up, now?
Perspiration dotted every pore on Vandhiyathevan's skin; so many were the
terrifying tales he had heard about the dungeons of this fort-city. He sought
a particularly large column and slid behind it at once. As courageous as he
was, even warrior Vandhiyathevan's limbs quaked, at that moment.
Three shadowy forms moved up the staircase—and all happened to be
human. One carried a spear; another held aloft a torch. The one in the
middle however, held nothing in his hands. Terror released its hold on

Vandhiyathevan; intense amazement took its place when he caught sight of
their faces in the steadily brightening torch-light. For the front-runner of the
trio was none other than his dearest friend, Kandamaran!
As for the man in the middle—Vandhiyathevan felt a surreal feeling settle
over him, as though he were watching the strangest illusion—for it looked
startlingly like Nandhini. The next instant, he saw that this was not true; this
was a man; the beautiful prince Madhuranthakar in fact, whom he had
barely peeked at, in Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar's palace. The third man was
unfamiliar—some sort of a servant or soldier, no doubt.
Vallavarayan's mind spun at an astonishing speed; within moments, he had
unraveled the mystery of the three men slinking their way along this pitchblack staircase: Pazhuvoor's young queen had entered the fort a day ago;
Periya Pazhuvettarayar, the night before. Both had left and returned to the
city in full view of the public—but Madhuranthakar was a different matter;
his movements could not, of course, be known. Thus, the secret passage—
and this was probably the real mystery behind the palace of shadows.
As for Kandamaran—once he saw Vandhiyathevan off on the banks of the
Kollidam, the Kadambur scion had probably joined Periya Pazhuvettarayar,
who had promptly co-opted him into his own personal service. One of those
duties had probably been escorting Madhuranthaka Devar through this
secret passage—ah! He did remember now that Kandamaran had made
obscure references to a task in Thanjai: “I may find myself there soon
enough—I have a commission to execute …”—doubtless, this was it.
What would his dear friend think now if he, Vandhiyathevan, suddenly
appeared in front of him?
The next instant, he changed his mind. Presenting himself to Kandamaran
was the last thing he could do; the way things were, and considering the
oath he had sworn, one of two things was bound to happen: Kandamaran
would be forced to kill him, or Vandhiyathevan would. Either, of course,
was out of the question. Why on earth must he allow such complications to
arise?
By this time, the secret trio had climbed up the stairs and vanished out of
sight; the light dimmed steadily, as well. Vandhiyathevan considered
following them for a brief moment, and swiftly changed his mind.

Doubtless, they were on their way to Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's palace, and
what was the use, pray, in Vallavarayan returning there? He may as well
place his head in a lion's gaping jaw, having barely managed to escape it
once, already. There was no point in returning to Nandhini's latha
mandapam either; Periya Pazhuvettarayar might have arrived there, by now
—and danger lurked in every corner. What else could do? As to that, why
not climb down these very stairs himself?
To think was to act. Our young warrior stepped gingerly onto the stairs, and
began his wary descent.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 41

The Vault
Vandhiyathevan descended into the gloomy secret passage, making sure
every step was slow, but sure—and most important, that he did not fall
headlong into pitch black. The steps went down for while—then leveled out
—more descent—level again. He spread his hands out, hoping to reach the
walls, but found none. Suffice it to say that this was a vast passage, indeed.
A while later, the steps ascended, and then seemed to curve—appappa!
How much further was he supposed to go? How long was this path anyway,
and how long must he stumble along this inky blackness?
Ah—what was this now? The darkness seemed to be retreating a little! Very
faint light appeared to meet his vision. Now, where could it possibly come
from? Moonlight, perhaps, from somewhere in the roof? Chinks in the
windows of this massive hall? Or was there a lamp stashed away in a
hidden alcove, light escaping its prison?
No, nothing of the sort! Why, what sort of sorcery was this that met his eyes
—? Was such a scene truly unfolding in front of him? Or had his brain
finally scrambled itself for good?
The mandapam Vallavarayan was making his way through happened to be
built on a massive scale—carved out from the very rock, and made into a
fantastic underground chamber. That explained why the ceiling was so low
that it often brushed his head. And as for the light—it certainly was not
errant moon or lamp light, seeping through the roof or chinks in the walls.
No, these strange rays came from something that lay in small heaps all
along the walls, on the floor, or spread about in an untidy mess. Ah, and
what a sight they did make, to be sure!
Pearly light danced off unearthly objects grouped on the floor: beautifully
finished crowns—set with gorgeous rubies, emeralds and diamonds; and

there, on the other side lay rich strands of pearls, necklaces that gleamed
with the fire of precious stones. And, oh, what was in that large vessel,
now? Good god, it was filled to overflowing with white pearls, glowing
with the dull sheen of beautiful Punnai buds! Large, round, pearls! And
gold coins brimmed over that pot in the corner, glinting like the rays of the
late evening sun. Here were gold bars—why, this seemed, in truth, to be the
precious treasury of Thanjai! Hardly surprising, in that case, that it lay
concealed under a gloomy palace right beside the Treasurer Periya
Pazhuvettarayar's own mansion. Ah, and here Vandhiyathevan had been led,
by god knew what good fortune—for hadn't it been the combined grace of
both Goddess Bhagyalakshmi and Lady Luck, that had brought him in
here? Hadn't he learnt of one of Chozha Nadu's biggest secrets, through no
great effort on his own? All that was necessary now, was to divine how to
make the best use of it. Forget that—he didn't even want to leave this place.
All his desires devolved to a pin-point: weaving through these treasures.
Hunger and thirst would turn alien to him; he wouldn't even feel the urge to
sleep! What lay in front of his dazzled eyes were the fruits of over a
hundred invasions, by thousands of Chozha soldiers, earned by their sweat
and blood. He had heard monumental tales of those famed riches, the
navanidhis, or the nine treasures—and all of them seemed to be here, at his
very feet! Why, not even Kuberan, the lord of all worldly wealth could hope
to beat a treasure trove such as this! Why on earth would anyone leave it all
alone?
Vandhiyathevan wandered among the treasures, powerless to tear himself
away. He fingered the delicately fashioned crowns in one corner; took up
the necklaces that lay in another. The next instant, he dropped them, strode
over to the brass pot, plunged his arm into the pearls and watched as they
dripped through his fingers, thunderstruck. He ploughed through another
pot full of gold coins, gazing at them in wonder.
Then—he caught sight of something else that seemed to glow dully, spread
out in an expanse, in a corner, and went to investigate it. It defied
explanation at first, and Vandhiyathevan bent down, peering at the heap.
The next instant, he jumped away, stunned.
Ayyo—good god, it was a skeleton! A human being who had once
possessed skin, flesh, blood, nerves, hair, eyes, face and ears—and was now
just a pile of bones. And—oh, it seemed to be moving—was it coming to

life? Was it jingling and jangling, very like the gold coins he had touched a
few scant instants ago? Was it—was it—trying to tell him something?
Every hair on Vallavarayan's body prickled with terror. Had he finally, gone
quite mad?
Chee!—Of course not. The skeleton was as lifeless as ever; it was just a rat,
trying to ease its way out from under it. Here it is, running over my foot.
Ah, now that I see, the skeleton is quite still, on the ground—but it is true,
isn't it, that it's been trying to tell me something? Run away—do not tarry
here. For I too, was a human being like you once, a living, breathing man—
but I lingered here too long and died, lost in this tomb! I am fated to
crumble to dust. Do not repeat my mistake—run, run!
This bag of bones is perfectly right to warn me—should I stay, I shall share
its fate. I must leave at once, at once for if I don't, I'm done for!
In vain did Vandhiyathevan try to find a way out—to no purpose. There
seemed to be no path of escape; neither could he find the way he had come.
No matter where he went in this wretched underground vault, the demon of
darkness welcomed him with its gaping maw; the corners were especially
terrible. As for peering down—Vandhiyathevan felt as though he were
slipping into hell itself; it seemed to descend forever, into unfathomable
darkness. The stairs he had taken must be around here somewhere; all he
had to do was run into them.
Vandhiyathevan wandered endlessly through the hall, hoping to stumble
against them. On one of his endless circuits around it, he almost ran into a
heap of gold coins. He stared hard at what seemed to be a web of some sort
—ah, a spider's web, shiny and delicate, spreading its tendrils over the
coins. Almost in spite of himself, it set off a train of thoughts, within him.
He had heard elders speak often, of the perils of land, women, and gold; of
the way they spun complicated webs of allure, waiting for men to commit
the gravest sins—much like a spider that awaits its prey. And a fly arrives
from nowhere, fascinated by the web and alights on it—whereat the spider
draws its hapless prey in, and swallows it whole. Such were the three great
temptations of mankind—they lay in wait, so man would get caught in their
toils, and once he did, there was no escape whatsoever.

As for Vandhiyathevan—strange indeed, that he had managed to encounter
all three the very same day! There had been the young queen of Pazhuvoor,
Nandhini, at first, who had tried to ensnare him with her considerable
beauty; not satisfied with that, she had tried to overpower him with wily
words about the Vaanar dynasty's ancient lands, and held aloft the vain hope
that she might procure them for him. And now, here was the vast treasure of
Thanjai, trying to capture him with its gleaming, glittering attractions! He
had managed to escape with his wits intact from the first two—now he
would have to walk away from the third as well.
After all—why must he concern himself with kingdoms, wealth and the
lures of wily women? This great land, with the sky as its marvelous roof
was his palace in every way; and wasn't there a famous verse, a unique,
fulfilling philosophy that he'd heard from his Thamizh ancestors often:
“Yaadhum Oore; Yaavarum Kelir”—All the countries on earth are my
home; everyone here is my family? And in truth, the earth was his and its
residents, his friends. What could be better than to visit them all, hopping
from one kingdom to another of his own sweet will? He would spend his
life travelling by rivers that overwhelmed their banks with fresh floods;
glory in luxurious forests where trees sprouted new leaves in the spring, and
birds of every feather and colour flitted across the heavens; gaze with
delight at deer, peacocks, hills with summits that touched the very skies;
stand in awe at vast oceans as their waves crashed onto the shores—thus
would he live, eating what he could, wherever he found food; sleep where
the urge overtook him. Ah, this, indeed, was the sort of life worth living!
And a wonderfully satisfying one it would be too. Why on earth would
anyone want to give up something like this, so easily within his grasp, and
choose a life fraught with conspiracies, perils and desires that were more
dangerous that death itself? Somehow, he would have to escape this
wretched chamber; then the palace of gloom and Thanjavur itself. Never
would he allow himself to be caught in their toils again—
—but wait. Was that the sound of a door opening? Were those footsteps
again? Ah, would there never be an end to the night's mysterious
happenings? Nor the terrors, apparently.
It seemed to Vandhiyathevan that the footsteps, this time, seemed to come
from very far away—and from two different directions, to boot.
Vandhiyathevan sharpened his ears, and listened as keenly as he could; his

eyes cleaved through the inky blackness in all four directions, straining to
see something, anything. And in a while, he had his reward.
It was as though a Koothu was playing itself out on a stage set very far
away, and those acting their roles were minute figures on it—from where he
stood, Vandhiyathevan watched events unfold at a considerable distance, on
what seemed a slightly elevated plane.
A torch appeared from one side of the Koothu stage; another shifted aside
the screen, and appeared from the opposite. The two came closer and closer
to each other. Two dark, hefty figures came to light in one; two more, in the
other. One of the latter was tall and majestic while the other, petite and
slender. The two parties approached each other evermore, and
Vandhiyathevan's eyes almost bulged with the strain of identifying them. By
dint of great effort, he was successful: the figures on the left were
Kandamaran and his escort; the ones to the right were Periya
Pazhuvettarayar and his young queen, Nandhini Devi.
What would happen, Vandhiyathevan wondered, when these two parties ran
into one another? Some sort of catastrophe? Or would they meet in a
convivial fashion, and leave way for the other? He almost forgot to breathe
as suspense gripped him, watching the two groups converge.
Considering the way they stumbled about with some confusion, an
unexpected meeting appeared to have been the last thing on their minds;
both parties seemed amazed and perplexed at running across each other in
the dark—but contrary to Vandhiyathevan's fears, nothing disastrous
occurred. Periya Pazhuvettarayar asked something of Kandamaran, to
which that young man gave an answer. Vallavarayan could hear none of
their exchange, however. The Pazhuvoor lord made some sort of sign and
pointed towards the secret staircase, to which Kandamaran reciprocated by
bowing low with deep reverence, and proceeding towards said stairs. Periya
Pazhuvettarayar watched him walk way, and then made a gesture to
Kandamaran's menial, who still held aloft the burning torch. That worthy
bowed in turn, accepting the command with his palm over his mouth. He
followed Kandamaran almost at once, while the Pazhuvoor lord and his
consort went on their way, to the left.
All these events, almost like something out of a mysterious shadow-tale or a
fascinating street-play had happened within the space of a few moments

and, Vandhiyathevan guessed, by the steps that led down to the
underground chamber. Ah, what a fortuitous coincidence, then, that he
hadn't dawdled about by the staircase and had wandered instead, into the
chamber itself! What a terrible state of affairs would it have been if he had
ended up between these two parties? Thankfully, that possibility had not
come to pass and he was safe.
Now what, though? He would still have to find a way of escape. There was
no doubt that Kandamaran was making his way back, having escorted
Madhuranthaka Devar to his residence; he, Vandhiyathevan, had probably
veered off his own course and ended up in the treasury. Following his friend
now would doubtless lead him to the door that led outside the fort—and
once there, he would come up with a ruse to bluster his way out. Why, he
could even ask Kandamaran himself for assistance, or if the worse came to
worst, he could take him on and his servant in a bout. Either way, following
the Kadambur prince was the best option, now.
The torch seemed to approach the chamber at first. Vandhiyathevan sucked
in his breath and stood stock-still. Then, it seemed to move away and by its
light, he saw the steps by which he must have descended into the vault. He
went down them once again, and climbed up with noiseless steps, making
sure he kept the light in his range of vision, taking the greatest care never to
alert the friend of his presence. Up and down he went, marveling at the
curves and twists in the path, the dead-ends and endless loops that seemed
designed to confound anyone—good heavens, no one could hope to follow
it in the dark and make it outside, safe and sound! Long live Kandamaran—
but how could Vallavarayan ever repay this aid, rendered unknown, by his
friend?
There was no way he could have guessed that an opportunity was about to
present itself, in a matter of moments.
The end of the secret passage was in sight, at last; a vast stone wall rose in
front of them, at an impressive height. It was almost impossible to suppose
that it concealed some sort of entrance and yet—there must be a way out
through the wall, mustn't there?
Kandamaran's guide shifts his torch from his right hand to the left, places
his free hand on the wall and does something—he seems to twist some sort
of a bolt. A cleft appears in the wall; a thin line that grows larger by the

moment, rapidly reaching the dimensions of a full grown man. The guard
points to it and says something; Kandamaran gives a reply and places a foot
outside the door. The other is still within the fort—his back is now visible.
But ah—what is this? The guard seems to be pulling out a small, curved
dagger from within his waistband and—good god, he's stabbed
Kandamaran in the back with it! That wretched bastard—a scoundrel who
plunges daggers in unsuspecting backs —!
Vandhiyathevan darted out of his hiding-place, and sprang forward. The
guard sensed movement, and turned the same instant.
The torch's flickering light fell full, on Vallavarayan's wrathful
countenance.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 42

The Mark of a True Friend
Vandhiyathevan's first impulse was to save Kandamaran, somehow—but he
retained enough of his wits to know that he would share his friend's fate,
should he attempt to do so. No, what he had to accomplish first, was to take
care of the villainous guard—he sprang forward and wound his arm around
the man's neck. He swatted away the torch with another, which promptly
rolled on the ground and began to smoke, its light shrinking.
Vandhiyathevan tightened his grip on the guard's neck, gathered all his
strength and delivered a mighty push. The guard staggered and fell, his
head smashing onto the secret passage's wall.
He lay as though dead, but Vallavarayan, once he had approached the man
cautiously and ascertained that he was indeed unconscious, took the
precaution of tying up his hands with his angavasthram.
All immediate danger at an end within a matter of moments,
Vandhiyathevan hastened towards Kandamaran. His dear friend's body, he
found, lay half within the secret passage and half without, the dagger stuck
in his back; his spear lay beside him as well. Vallavarayan stepped out and
dragged Kandamaran's body away, picking up the spear; the passage closed
at once. The massive walls stood silent, clothed in shadows, guarding their
eternal secret from prying eyes.
Judging by the stiff winds that almost blew him away, Vandhiyathevan
guessed that he was finally outside the fort. Trees towered over the horizon,
not to mention the enormous battlements and fort ramparts, which meant
that the moonlight was meager indeed.
He hoisted Kandamaran onto his shoulder, scooped up his spear and took a
step forward—only to feel the earth slipping away under him, almost
carrying him away in a landslide. He stuck the spear in the ground and with

considerable effort, halted his downward progress. Then, he craned his neck
and peered down.
Amidst the shade thrown by ramparts and trees on the ground flowed water
—and, Vandhiyathevan spied, in the dim light, that it whirled and tumbled
forward at great speed. Thank heavens, then, that he hadn't put his foot right
into it—or he would have somersaulted straight into disaster! God had,
indeed, saved him, but that treacherous guard—ah, what was the point in
thinking of him, now? Doubtless, he had only carried out his master's
instruction—to stab him in the back and dispose of the body by throwing it
into these floodwaters. Had Vandhiyathevan not been inordinately
surefooted, both of them would be tumbling into the water's depths, by now.
And even had Vallavarayan managed to regain his footing, Kandamaran
was sure to have gone to a watery grave.
The Vaanar clan's scion had learnt, before this, of the River Vadavaaru that
almost hugged the Thanjavur fort walls at one point—well, this must be it,
then. And though the river was not supposed to be swollen with floods, it
might well have been considerably deep at this point by the fort; who
knew? Vandhiyathevan dipped his spear into the waters, testing the depths
—and found, to his horror, that even fully submerged, the spear did not
strike the bed. Ah, those wretched, bloody rogues —!
But there was no more time to be lost in reflecting upon these betraying
idiots; he and Kandamaran had to make their escape right away.
Vandhiyathevan stepped forward, taking the greatest care that he did not
lose his footing along the river banks; Kandamaran on his shoulder and his
spear gripped tight in his hands. His injured friend groaned and moaned
twice or thrice which was, frankly, rather encouraging.
He trudged on for a while, gritting his teeth, until the fort-walls seemed to
move away; the forest began to creep in along the banks. Thorns lay aplenty
underfoot, which made the going difficult but oh, what was this—a large
tree lay right across the river! Of great height as well—the river must have
scoured its roots and weakened them; it lay almost to half the river's
breadth.
Vandhiyathevan climbed onto it and staggered along its length, trying to
keep his balance on a trunk that wove a little from one side to another, in

the waters; its branches and leaves thrashed helplessly amidst the swirling
currents. The wind howled around him as well. Vandhiyathevan made his
way to the end of the tree and stuck his spear into the waters again—thank
Lord Murugan! For the waters were not quite so deep here. He stepped off
the tree and into the river, walking gingerly across, feeling his way across
troughs and crests in the bed, making sure he withstood the winds and
raging floodwaters through the sheer force of his mind, and perseverance.
His body shuddered helplessly sometimes, with the strain of it; at others, it
seemed as though Kandamaran might slip and fall into the river. And yet,
Vandhiyathevan braved all ills and finally scrambled onto the shore. He
staggered for a while along the banks, trembling in clothes that were
drenched to the waist, still hefting a Kandamaran who was of not
inconsiderable height and weight. A little later, the densely clustered trees
gave way into a small clearing and he stopped, lowering Kandamaran
slowly to the ground.
First in the order of things was to take a respite, for the moment—but he
wished to know if there was still life in his friend's body. For, what was the
purpose in lugging along a corpse? Far better to take that wretched guard's
course and throw the body into the river—no, no, Kandamaran was still
alive; his chest rose and fell with heaving breaths; a tumultuous pulse
thudded in his wrist.
So far, so good—but now what? Pulling out the dagger was out of the
question; blood would gush out of the wound, and kill him. No, what
Kandamaran needed at once was medicine; his wounds had to be dressed
with skill—but these were hardly tasks that could be done by him alone,
were they? No, Vandhiyathevan needed assistance, but who else would –
Wait, what about Sendhan Amudhan? His home and garden were on the
banks of the River Vadavaaru, weren't they? Bound to be somewhere
nearby, surely? Kandamaran might have a chance of survival if
Vandhiyathevan managed to drag them both to Amudhan's home. What did
he stand to lose, anyway?
Vandhiyathevan bent towards his friend, prepared to heft him onto his
shoulders again and stopped—for Kandamaran's eyes were open. “Why,
Kandamara—you're awake! Do you recognize me?” Delight and
amazement suffused his countenance.

“Very well indeed. You're Vallavarayan, of course—how could I forget such
an excellent friend? You're the kind that stabs a man in the back, aren't
you?”
“Ayyo!” The words lashed at Vallavarayan like a vicious whip. “But I
wasn't the one who—” he stopped abruptly, as though remembering
something.
“Of course not; all your knife did was to caress my back like a feather—you
bastard! You were the reason I hurried down the secret passage at all—I
wanted to get hold of you before Pazhuvettarayar's men did—to prevent
anyone else capturing and torturing you. I swore that I would find you
somehow, and enlist you in Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's Fort Guards Regiment
—and here you are, betraying the friend who wished to help you! Is this the
mark of true friendship? Have you forgotten all the times we clasped our
hands, swearing to protect each other? Now you—you've destroyed
everything! Ah, how eager I was to tell you of—of the stunning changes
that were about to sweep through this Chozha Empire—how I wished to
warn you about—but how am I ever to trust anyone again?” Kandamaran
closed his eyes, slipping into oblivion. The effort of such hurried and
furious speech had doubtless drained his strength.
“If it came to that, what's the lack of people to trust?” Vandhiyathevan
mumbled. “Who on earth would rely on the Pazhuvettarayars, anyway?”
For all that, however, tears started in his eyes. He blinked hard and
concluded that he had been wise to stay silent, after all. Then, he heaved
Kandamaran upon his shoulder and resumed his journey.
The scent of blooms engulfed him thickly, in the stillness of the night; he
had been right to assume that Sendhan Amudhan's home must be
somewhere nearabouts. And within moments, he did reach the garden—but
oh, what a difference between his first visit and now! Now, that beautifully
kept garden looked like the ancient Ashokavanam destroyed by Lord
Hanuman in a fury; like the exquisite madhuvanam wrecked by the
vaanarams, the monkey-kind of Ramayana. Ah, it did seem like Periya
Pazhuvettarayar's dutiful men had descended here as well, in search of him
—and paid their respects in due fashion, heaping destruction. To think of all
the trouble Sendhan Amudhan and his dear mother had gone to,

maintaining this wonderful, rich little garden! And now—everything was in
rack and ruins.
Abruptly, Vandhiyathevan remembered his own precarious state—and all
thoughts of sympathy for the flower garden vanished. What if those
wretched spies and security guards lurked about, still? Well, he had no
choice but take them on in combat. Thank heavens at least for his horse,
though, which stood tied to the tree … wait, what if this was a trap as well?
No matter; there was nothing he could do but relinquish Kandamaran into
the care of these excellent people, and fly upon his steed—which would,
god willing, halt only in Pazhaiyarai.
Vandhiyathevan tiptoed across the garden, towards the hut. At the entrance,
he bent forward and tapped Sendhan Amudhan, who lay fast asleep on the
thinnai. The boy jerked awake, startled—upon which Vallavarayan laid a
swift hand over his mouth. “You're the only one who can help me, thambi,”
he spoke, in a low voice. “I find myself in terrible difficulties. This is my
dear friend, Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar's son Kandamaran. Someone stabbed
him, you see. I saw him on my way out and brought him with me.”
“Why, those rogues!” exclaimed Amudhan. “They've stabbed him in the
back too, brave warriors!” He paused for a moment. “I shall care for him as
much as I can. Several groups of soldiers barged here in search of you and
wreaked havoc on our beautiful garden—see, there's almost nothing left of
it. Never mind, though—it matters nothing if you manage to escape.
Thankfully, they've left your horse alone—now get on it and leave!”
“That, thambi, is my intention as well—but oughtn't we to do something
about saving my friend's life?”
“Don't you worry about that—my mother knows her way around medicines.
She's well-versed in handling wounds such as these.” And Sendhan
Amudhan tapped gently on the door, twice. It opened at once, and
Amudhan's mother stood in the entrance.
They carried Kandamaran into the house slowly, and laid him down in the
koodam, the hall. Sendhan Amudhan signed to his mother in the gentle light
of a hand-held lamp; it seemed that she understood him. She gazed keenly
at Kandamaran; glanced at the dagger in his back, and left swiftly, returning

with rags and a few medicinal herbs. Then, she looked meaningfully at the
two of them.
Sendhan Amudhan gripped the Kadambur prince tight. Vandhiyathevan
gathered himself, placed a hand on the dagger sticking out of his friend's
back, and pulled it out.
Blood gushed out of the wound. “Oh!” Even unconscious, Kandamaran
screamed in agony.
Vandhiyathevan covered his mouth swiftly.
Sendhan Amudhan pressed down on the bleeding wound as hard as he
could.
Amudhan's mother dressed the injury efficiently, with fresh herbs.
Kandamaran groaned pitifully, again.
Footsteps thudded in the distance—men running towards the hut.
“Go—now!” Amudhan admonished. “Quickly!”
Vandhiyathevan picked up the blood-stained dagger and spear, and then
hesitated. “Thambi—you do believe in me, don't you?”
“I believe in God. And I do like you. But—why do you ask?”
“I require your assistance again. You see, I'm new to these parts, and don't
quite know my way around. I wish to reach Pazhaiyarai at once, and deliver
a message to Kundhavai Devi. Would you be able to guide my way a
little?”
At once, Sendhan Amudhan turned to his mother and signed something, to
which she signified assent. The lady, it seemed, was not unduly perturbed
by the night's happenings. She signed to him, in addition, that she would
take care of the injured man as well.
They left together; Thevan on his horse while Sendhan climbed on behind
him. Vandhiyathevan set his steed to a quiet trot, careful not attract the
slightest attention. A little distance, and he set the horse galloping. The
animal tore through the night, carrying its burden.
Five or six soldiers descended upon the hut, the instant the horse set off;
they banged on the door furiously. Amudhan's mother opened the door, and

stood framed by the entrance.
“What was the noise we heard just now?” yelled a soldier.
Amudhan's mother quavered some sort of vague, blubbering response.
“What's the point of asking this deaf mute?” snapped another. “We'd better
go in and see for ourselves.”
“She's barring our path, isn't she?”
“Where on earth is that flower-boy?”
“Swat that mute away and get into that cottage!”
Amudhan's mother howled something more in her own, unique tongue, and
tried to shut the door in the man's face. Four or five of the brawny soldiers
pushed themselves through, making it impossible for her to do so. She
shrieked something and abruptly, let the door go—upon which two or three
lost their balance and practically rolled in through the entrance, falling at
her feet. The others trampled over them, in their haste to enter the hut.
“Here he is!” yelled one.
“Finally!” crowed another. “Got himself into our clutches, did he?”
“Grab him before he runs,” instructed another. “Tie him up!”
The mute woman blubbered wildly.
“Good god—what's with all the blood?” echoed a soldier.
Amudhan's mother held aloft the lamp and pointed to the injured man in its
feeble light. “Beh! Beh!”
“Adei—this looks like someone else!”
“Beh—beh!”
“Is this the man who came here last night?”
“Beh—beh!”
“Where's your son?”
“Beh—beh!”

“Quiet, you dumb corpse! Adei—look at this one carefully. Does anyone
recognize him? Well?”
“Not him.”
“Of course it's him!”
“No—never!”
“Beh—beh!”
“Whoever he might be, we must take him to the fort at once. Come, carry
him!”
“Beh—Beh—Beh—Beh!”
“Shut up, saniyane!”
Four of the brawny men hefted Kandamaran up. “Beh—Beh—Beh—Beh—
Beh—Beh!” bawled the woman, without a pause.
“Wait—are those horse-hooves?”
“Half of you carry this one—the rest, go and see who that is.”
“This one isn't going any where. Come, all of you!”
They dropped Kandamaran, and ran out as one.
Amudhan's mother's unearthly shrieks followed them all the way out.
“Behbeh! Behbeh! Behbeh!”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 43

Pazhaiyarai
Our hero Vandhiyathevan is destined to undergo a great many difficulties;
fall in and out of a score of perils before he can set foot in Pazhaiyarai—so
we request our readers to kindly make an entrance into this fair city, before
he does.
Now gaze at it, if you will, from your vantage point on the southern banks
of the River Arisilaaru. Adada, surely this is more than just a city? Is it not
the very embodiment of a beautiful ornament that adorns the Goddess of
Thamizh's shapely forehead? Is it not, dear reader, a dazzling pendant, a
netrichutti set with exquisitely lovely green emeralds and rubies, upon her
divine form?
Ah, the rivers, streams, ponds and canals that surround this pretty city fairly
brim with water; their surfaces filled to overflowing with flowers of every
colour. Coconut and Punnai trees dot the landscape, the lush greenery
offering cool shade. Strands of golden blooms hang from Konrai trees in
profusion—and amidst nature's prolific creations rise incredible mansions
and palaces, their golden towers and temple gopurams cleaving through the
sky, such were their height.
Appappa! The number of little cities that all make up one magnificent
metropolis! Here are Nandhipura Vinnagaram, Thiruchathi Mutram,
Patteechuram, Arichandhrapuram—these smaller cities and their temples
together form part of Pazhaiyarai, the capital city, as a whole. Four temples
dedicated to Siva Peruman adorn the city in each direction: Vadathali,
Keezthali, Metrali and Thenthali. Four settlements meant exclusively for
soldiers, veerapuris, as their reputation says, dot the city as well:
Ariyappadai Veedu, Pudhuppadai Veedu, Manappadai Veedu and
Pambaippadai Veedu. And in the midst of them all, standing tall, piercing
the very heavens with its numerous towers, galleries, pavilions and

balconies was the Chozha Royal Palace—but was it just one palace?
Certainly not! In the time of Vijayalaya Chozha, perhaps—but in the
intervening years, every Chozha prince, his royal consort and princess had
added his or her own dwelling and now, ah, one would need a thousand
eyes to just take in the glorious sight of scores of new palaces adorning the
original, central palace. Not even ten thousand poets could, with all their
considerable talents, hope to describe even a fraction of their beauty.
Why, hark at poet Sekkizhar Peruman's divine words on the city, two
hundred years later:
“Therinmeviya sezhumani veedhigal sirandhu
Paaril neediya perumaiser pathi Pazhaiyarai …”
The streets—avenues—people—ah, was there any other city to rival its
merits? And if it had been thus in the poet's times, how much more
magnificent would it have been during the reign of Sundara Chozha?
And yet—our first visit to this exquisite city is not attended quite by the
same festive spirit that is described so fulsomely by these divine poets. For
we were not so fortunate as to witness the grandeur of this metropolis when
it was the principal seat of Emperor Sundara Chozha, when he ruled from
this city, the centre of the Chozha Empire.
Once the Emperor, struck by ill-health, left for Thanjai, the many royal
visits from foreign territories; kings and princes who paid obeisance, and
likewise, ambassadors, ministers and commanders, gradually tapered off
into almost nothing; so did the parivarams that invariably formed part of
their retinue.
The normally effervescent four padaiveedu settlements looked considerably
empty; more than half the soldiers were presently involved in the Eezham
war, eager to display the best of Tamil valour to the world. The rest were off
fighting in the northern frontiers, or exhibiting martial skills in Madurai.
This meant that the settlements were populated by the infirm, women and
children, for the most part.
The Velakkara Regiment that had made their home in Mazhavarpadi had
uprooted their families and moved to Thanjai as well, which meant that the
part of the city that accommodated their residences now sported a vacant
look.

Ministers, royal saamanthakas and officers involved in the everyday
working of the government had all shifted to Thanjai as well, their families
in tow.
For all the considerable decline in the number of residents, Pazhaiyarai's
streets have not lost their pomp and splendour, yet. Its wide avenues wellnigh burst at the seams with people hurrying about their business: temple
sthapathis, sculptors, devout Saivites, those who sang the divinely beautiful
Thevaram hymns or Odhuvaars; temple officials and servants, tourists from
many corners of the land who had journeyed all the way to visit the temples
or partake in its celebrations.
Today, in particular, is a day of auspicious festivities, a thiruvizha, it would
seem. Men, women and children parade about in their finest dresses and
ornaments. People throng the streets, congregating in certain corners, and in
the midst of such crowds are costumed people, singing and dancing—ah,
how interesting! Surely we must know what parts they play? Why, here
they are, dressed as Krishna, or Balarama and the Gopalas! Ah, here is a
scene where Krishna holds a mammoth mountain and Indra, Lord of the
Devas falls at his feet, doesn't he? And over there, amidst another crowd
stands Lord Brahma, complete with four heads, paying obeisance to
Krishna—ah, now we understand. Today is Sri Jayanthi, divine Lord
Krishna's birthday, and that is the reason for this gaiety; these festivities.
Not to be outdone by these street-theatre displays, there are uriyadi sports
as well, where pots are tied to poles high up, and onlookers try to hit it to
much glee, while showered with turmeric-water by the uproarious public.
All these in the vicinity of the Nandhipura Vinnagara Temple—but oh, what
is this?
“Kanden Kanden Kanden
Kannuk kiniyana Kanden!”
Ah, who sings with such ecstasy, of gazing at the Lord? Where have we
heard this voice, before? And indeed—here stands our old friend
Azhwarkkadiyaar Nambi in all his Vaishnavite glory. A few have gathered
around him already; some listen devoutly, attracted by the verses; other
have begun a crude heckling. We fear for these naïve onlookers, wondering
how Azhwarkkadiyaar's trusty staff will handle their thick skulls.

But stay—some sort of commotion at the entrance to the Vinnagara Temple.
The chariots and palanquins by the side of the street are brought to the
massive front-door; several ladies emerge from within the temple,
obviously part of the royal family. And indeed—these are the high-born
princesses and queens who adorn the many royal residences of Pazhaiyarai.
At the forefront, leading them all is Chembian Maadevi, renowned through
the Chozha Empire as Periya Piratti; princess of the ancient Mazhavarayar
clan, and royal consort of the devout Saivite, Emperor Kandaradithya. Age
might have marked her, and somber attire might announce widowhood—
but how regal her features; how radiant her countenance! Behind her walks
Arinjaya Chozha's consort, scion of the Vaithumbarayar dynasty, Kalyani.
The exquisite loveliness of her finely chiseled features is obvious, despite
her advancing years—how much more beautiful must she have been in her
youth? Surely there is nothing to wonder at, then, that her son Sundara
Chozhar is known universally for his good looks?
Following in her footsteps is another of Sundara Chozhar's queens, a
princess of the Cheraman clan, Paranthakan Devi.
In their wake arrive maidens, celestial nymphs who appear to have
descended upon earth straight from the heavens: Kundhavai Piratti, Vanathi,
and princesses of various Thamizh clans, whom we have been acquainted
with, before.
Chozha kings have worshipped at the feet of Siva Peruman and Goddess
Durga from the times of Vijayalaya—that did not mean, however, that they
abhorred Thirumaal, or other faiths and religions prevalent in the country.
Far from form it, in fact, which might explain why all had assembled in full
regalia at the Vinnagara Temple—to celebrate Kannan's birthday, no doubt.
It was as Periya Piratti was about to climb into her palanquin, that
Azhwarkkadiyaar's song fell upon her ears. Was that, perhaps, why the
Vaishnavite sang at the top of his voice? It seemed to have achieved its
purpose, though, for Chembian Maadevi immediately called him to her
side.
Azhwarkkadiyaar duly obeyed her summons, standing in front of her, head
bowed, hands folded.

“Well, Thirumalai? I have not seen you for a while,” began Periya Piratti.
“Were you on a pilgrimage, perhaps?”
“Indeed, yes, thaaye—I did visit a great many holy sites. Thirupathi,
Kanchi, and Veera Narayanapuram to mention just a few. What was more—
I heard and saw a great many wondrous things too.”
“Our Palace tomorrow—and you may recount your many adventures in
detail.”
“I'm afraid not, Amma. I shall have to leave this very night.”
“In that case, you may come this evening.”
“Of course, thaaye. Your wish is my command.”
The many palanquins and chariots began to roll away, towards the palaces.
Kundhavai Piratti pointed towards the rotund Azhwarkkadiyaar and
murmured something to her coterie; the lovely maidens broke into merry
peals of laughter. Azhwarkkadiyaar turned in the direction of the mirth,
hoping to see its cause.
Princess Kundhavai's exquisite eyes met the Vaishnavite's, conversing in a
code obviously known only to them.
Azhwarkkadiyaan bowed a little in her direction—a sign that he had
understood her surreptitious message.
Chembian Maadevi's impressive palace lay at the very heart of a sprawling
complex of royal residences in Pazhaiyarai; in its principal council
chamber, its sabha mandapam, sat the gracious queen, on a gold throne
studded with nine precious gems. Following the devout path of religious
saints such Karaikkal Ammaiyar and Thilakavathiyaar, she seemed the very
epitome of austerity, draped in spare white silk, her features adorned with
sacred ash and rudraksha necklaces—but no other ornaments. Surrounded
by almost limitless wealth—the Ashta Aiswaryam, or the eight great riches
—she proved, to those who saw her, that it was possible to live the life of an
ascetic entirely devoted to God, even amongst dazzling treasures. No
bejeweled crown graced her head; nor any of the jewellery associated with
royalty—and yet, her regal presence, radiant countenance, and an
undeniable majesty announced: here was a queen among queens, a woman
born to rule, who had married into royalty and held all in her sway. Gazing

at her, it was easy to understand why every member of the Chozha royal
family fell in with her every wish, held her in such great esteem, and never
gainsaid her, at any time.
For all that, however—it seemed that something had happened to mar the
serenity that surrounded her; the aura of piety seemed to have suffered a
blemish. Her son, the pious Siva devotee, Madhuranthaka Devar had gone
against his mother's wishes, nay, her express command, and married into
the Pazhuvettarayar clan. Rumours had floated in, moreover, that he aspired
to the Chozha throne—all these, not unnaturally, had served to ruffle
Chembian Maadevi's composure a little.
It was the norm for Periya Piratti's sabha mandapam and palace courtyard to
overflow with enthusiastic temple sculptors, and echo with the hymns of
Thevaram singers who made eager journeys to meet their royal patron.
Devout Saivites and Thamizh poets often travelled great distances to
display their knowledge, and receive appropriate gifts in return. No less
were the crowds of priests, marching in with offerings, once their daily
worship at the temples were done.
That day, it was the turn of sculptors and devotes from the towns such as
Thirumudhukundram (Vridhaachalam), Then Kurangaduthurai and
Thirumazhapadi to petition the queen about commencing re-construction of
their respective temples in stone; many carried elaborate sketches and toy
temples that displayed the modifications, schemes, and plans they had each
visualized.
Having promised to duly begin the thiruppani, the sacred work on the first
two temples, Periya Piratti turned to the rest. “Mazhapadi?” she queried.
“Which would that be?”
“The one where our beloved Siva Peruman asked for Sundaramurthy
Nayanar Himself, gracious lady,” supplied the town's resident. “It is here
that the Lord holds court!”
“Pray, what is this incident you speak of?” inquired the Mazhavarayar
princess.
“You see, Amma, Sundaramurthy Nayanar, great Saivite that he was, went
on pilgrimages to many temples. On one such journey, a river barred his
path and he wished to cross it,” began the man from Mazhapadi. “But then,

just as he was about to do so, a voice suddenly rang out: “Sundaram! Have
you forgotten me?” Sundaramurthy stopped, startled—and realized that it
belonged to none other than Siva Peruman Himself, who had claimed him,
heart and soul. He turned to his disciples and asked. “Is there a temple for
Siva Peruman, hereabouts?” to which they replied. “Yes, Swami—the
temple of Mazhapadi is concealed behind those konrai trees.”
“At once, Sundaramurthy made his way to the konrai trees, flourishing with
fragrant blossoms—and in their midst, nestling among the foliage was a
little Siva shrine. Sundaramurthy worshipped at this temple, and sang the
most beautiful verses in its honour. He marveled at the grace and
compassion of the Lord who, just as He had claimed him once, had called
out to Him again, in Mazhapadi. “Swami, what sort of a question is this?”
he wept, intensely moved. “How could I ever forget You? And if I ever did,
whom could I ever worship, in Your Place?” He set these, his heart's
outpourings in the following beautiful verses:
“Ponnar Meniyane!
Pulitholai Araikkasaithu
Minnaar Senjadai Mel
Milikonrai aninthavane!
Manne, Maamaniye,
Mazhapadiyul maanikkame!
Anne unnaiyallal
Ini yaarai ninaikkene?”
“Great Mother—that shrine, the one that Sundaramurthy sang such moving
verses to, still stands among those konrai trees, small and insignificant. It is
this temple that we seek to rebuild.”
“So be it,” assented Chembian Maadevi.
Azhwarkkadiyaar had arrived with a companion, by this time. Both stood at
a little distance, watchful spectators of the abovementioned events, their
senses on high alert.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 44

“This is all her doing!”
A sculptor stepped forward at this point, a descendent of the artisans who
had once worked in Maamallapuram, turning it from a port into a fantasy
world of indescribable sculptural beauty. He had fashioned a tiny model
temple for the stone re-construction, the katrali work to be done on existing
temples, and poured into it every ounce of the considerable imagination he
possessed. This, he now displayed, to the queen.
Periya Piratti gave her fulsome admiration, even going to so far as to call
the model to the attention of Azhwarkkadiyaan's companion. “Well, Battar?
Do you not see how beautiful this structure is? Indeed, my heart yearns to
shape Thamizhagam's most significant Siva temples in this new, exquisitely
lovely fashion.”
“Surely there can be no obstacle to carrying out any of your wishes,
thaaye?” concurred Eesana Siva Battar. “We could construct Siva sthalams
that have received the honour of a Thevaram hymn this way—the moment
people set eyes on it, they shall know that it is a “Paadal Petra Sthalam,”
that it has been sung by our great saints.”
“Indeed, yes! We must make an effort to gather all the hymns sung by
Appar, Gnana Sambandar and Sundaramurthy; every temple that they have
set foot it, every aalayam that has had the signal honour, the divine good
fortune of having a hymn dedicated to them, must cleave the very sky with
magnificent gopurams, re-built with stone that will last centuries. I have
harboured these two ambitions close to my heart for so very long—but I am
plagued by doubts that they may never be. Had my lord and master not
journeyed to the west and ascended to the feet of God—had he lived a little
longer, all my desires might have been fulfilled …”

“But—nothing has occurred to suggest otherwise, has it, thaaye? Has not
the Chakravarthy issued an edict, after all, that every single one of your
commands must be carried out in an instant? Both his sons have always
made it clear that they will divine your heart's deepest desires and
accomplish them, whatever they might be, even before you have given
expression to them; when such is the case—”
“– perhaps, but my heart is not at peace these days. Strange things I hear too
—apparently, some people are concerned that I am draining the royal
treasuries with my penchant for re-building temples in stone. Why does Siva
Peruman need so many temples, they ask, I am told. It does not worry me
that strangers speak so; but to hear that the Prince in Kanchi might harbour
the same sentiments—”
“Thaaye,” Even as Periya Piratti recounted her feelings, Azhwarkkadiyaan
stepped forward. “This servant is one among that number, I must confess.”
The queen gazed at him with considerable surprise; the others stared,
obviously startled and not a little perturbed at his presumption.
“My soul burns, Amma!” continued Azhwarkkadiyaan in a tone that fairly
exploded with sparks of fury. “How can anyone stomach this injustice? And
how can you, held to be the very goddess of dharma, ever countenance such
a grievous wrong?”
“Ignore my brother's coarse words, Your Highness,” soothed Eesana Siva
Battar, who stood by Thirumalaiyappan. “He is often prone to such fits of
fury, I am afraid. Please, forgive him.”
Religion, in those days was a vastly different affair from what it is, in the
present: Saivism and Vaishnavism were yet to undergo segregation. Devout
followers of Vishnu co-existed quite peacefully with fierce Saivites, often in
the same family. One Battar was quite likely to perform worship and rituals
at both a Siva Temple and Thirumaal's holy abode; Eesana Siva Battar was
one such enlightened, broad-minded soul. Thirumalaiyappan happened to
be his brother once removed; both cherished deep affection for each other,
despite their other differences—which explained why Battar craved pardon
for his brother's transgression.
“Peace, Thirumalai, and speak calmly,” smiled the Queen. “What is all this
talk of injustice now?”

“Just this, Your Highness—ah, the number of temples, gopurams and
magnificent complexes for a god clothed like a phantom; who carries a
skull and begs alms for offerings! How many stone reconstructions and
model temples! And yet, there is barely a one for Vishnu Murthy, who
guards all the worlds!” lamented Thirumalaiyappan. “Not even a stone
construction of an old, existing temple?”
“Amma, it is entirely natural that temples within massive complexes,
magnificent arenas and ambalams, beautifully carved chambers and golden
roofs be built to house the Peruman who performs a glorious cosmic dance
to cherish and nurture numerous worlds. As for Thirumaal, what does he do
but sleep endlessly? Surely all He requires is a tiny room, preferably dark,
without even a lamp?” queried the Battar. “Why build enormous temples
furbished with delicate alcoves and divine sculptures?”
“The One who sleeps endlessly as you deride him, Anna, is the one who
guards the world,” retorted Azhwarkkadiyaan. “He who pressed Mahabali
into the nether lands with his foot!”
“And yet, this Perumal who measured the three worlds, as you exalt, is the
one who went digging through the earth to seek our Siva Peruman's divine
lotus-feet, in a vain bid to find them—which he could not, if you remember,
try as he might, descending into the very Pathaala Logam!” quipped Eesana
Siva Battar.
“With a frame as large as that all that, why does your Sivan require a temple
I ask you?' barked Azhwarkkadiyaan. “Surely the temple would collapse
into ruins should he ever attempt to enter it?”
“Cease your quarrel, both of you,” laughed the Mazhavarayar princess.
“Thirumalai, what is all this talk about no temples for Thirumaal? Who said
any such thing? Why could you not make a courteous request for the
Vinnagara temple you wish to see rebuilt?”
“Ammani—recently, I had the opportunity to pay a visit to the sacred Veera
Narayanapuram Vinnagaram, named after your illustrious father-in-law, the
Emperor who ruled the Three Worlds, the noble Paranthaka Chakravarthy;
it is here that Thirumaal guards the massive Veera Narayana Lake, massive
as an ocean, without a moment's respite during either day or night. It was
here that I noticed, much to my dismay, that the great lord's temple walls,

built with brick and mortar, were beginning to crumble. Such can only bode
ill for the hundreds of residents of the region, gracious lady—for don't we
all know that the lake will destroyed, should the temple walls fall? Pray
rebuild the Vinnagaram with stone, I beseech you!”
“Very well; so be it,” promised the gracious Chozha queen. “You shall tell
me more—but now, it is time for our visitors to leave.”
Eesana Siva Battar and others duly took the hint and dispersed.
The next instant, Chembian Maadevi lowered her voice. “Thirumalai, your
pilgrimage—what were the holy sites you visited? What were the things
you heard? Reveal all to me, please, in detail. I know you have something
of grave import—was that not why you interrupted me, just now?”
“News of enormous consequence, yes, and I would have awaited your
pleasure before revealing them—but Your Highness began to speak of the
Kanchi Prince, and I believed it far more necessary to halt that thread of
thought. Who amongst those here were genuine devotees, and who, merely
spies? We know nothing of them, after all. Strange events are afoot all over
the country—the blade of betrayal might cleave us at any moment, from
anyone,” warned Thirumalaiyappan. “It behooves us to be extremely wary.”
“Indeed—and it is even worse that members of the same family, bound by
flesh and blood are now in the appalling position of suspecting one
another,” sighed the Periya Piratti. “When I think of Aditha Karikalan
himself—ah, how loyal he was? Why, he cherished such love and respect
for me, an hundred times more than what he felt for his own mother—but
even he doubts my intentions, now. Ah, Thirumalai, how I wish I had left
this dreadful world with my lord! But he bade me stay—he would not let
me leave—and delivered a great many responsibilities into my hands as
well,” she mourned. “What an unfortunate creature I am!”
“Your noble husband, Amma, was a saint who foresaw the past, present and
future. Was he not like the very incarnation of the illustrious King Janaka,
ruling the Chozha Empire in this wretched Kali Yugam? These lands are
fortunate, gracious lady, that he bade you remain after his passing—for it is
now your sacred responsibility to save the Chozha Empire from destroying
itself through civil unrest—prevent a lineage that spans a thousand years.,

from butchering its own sons and brothers. And that is a task only you can
accomplish!”
“Not quite, Thirumalai. My own son does not heed my words—how may I
expect anyone else to do so, then? But stay, you mentioned something about
spies, did you not? Who could spy on me—and why? Perhaps you suspect
Aditha Karikalan of such deeds?” queried that pious lady, steeped in
devotion to Siva Peruman. “Ah, does he now distrust me so much?”
“I'm afraid I heard his words with my own two ears, Amma—else, I
wouldn't have dared to believe that Prince Aditha Karikala entertained even
the slightest suspicion of you—”
“Did you? And what was it that you heard, Thirumalai?”
“They were seated by one of Maamallapuram's stone temples, and that was
were I heard them speak—”
“Whom do you mean by they?”
“One was Prince Aditha Karikalar; Thirukkovilur Malayaman was the
second, and the third happened to be Parthibendran, of the Pallavas. They
were deep in conversation; I managed to overhear them as I lay hidden in a
dark stone shrine. Malayaman and Parthibendran were furious; they spoke
in enraged tones of the Pazhuvettarayar brothers concocting a conspiracy
with your son Madhuranthaka Devar, and imprisoning the Emperor.
Malayaman declared that you must have been a part of such an evil
mission; the others assented. Parthibendran put forward the plan that they
must all march towards Thanjavur and free the Emperor; the others assented
to this as well—but the Prince wished to make one last attempt to bring his
father to Kanchi, without recourse to bloodshed. That was when they
decided unanimously on a course of action: send an olai to the
Chakravarthy through a trusted messenger. From what I could gather, this
envoy was no ordinary man—a warrior of great resourcefulness,
intelligence and courage; one who was capable of both delivering messages
and spying. I tried to engage him in conversation once, and believe me
when I say, Amma, that he slipped away from every one of my verbal traps
like an eel. Cunning as he was, he tried to wring information out from me,
while not revealing anything in return. Even the Kudandhai astrologer tried
his hand at extricating something from him, to no success. I've heard,

through reliable sources, that he actually did manage to seek an audience
with the Emperor and deliver the olai …”
“And then? What was the Emperor's answer?”
“Apparently a reply was promised the next day—but the Pazhuvettarayars
appear to have grown extremely suspicious of the messenger. Somehow, he
managed to escape all their nets and brawny soldiers, and fled the city
overnight!”
“In that case, an extremely resourceful man, no doubt. And what about you?
Once you left Kanchi—”
“My first intention was to arrive straight here. I stopped at the Veera
Narayanapuram Vinnagaram, however, to worship at the feet of Thirumaal
—where, by the grace of the lord, I practically stumbled upon an immense
secret …”
“Another one?”
“Indeed, thaaye. You see, the Sambuvaraiyars hosted a very grand feast at
the Kadambur palace that very night and what was more, Periya
Pazhuvettarayar was its guest of honour. Not to mention the fact that the
Ilaiya Rani's palanquin was a part of his retinue, as well.”
“This is all her doing, Thirumalai—this terrible calamity that stares Chozha
Nadu in the face, it is the work of that young woman! Were you able to
meet and speak with her?”
“That, Amma, is precisely what I couldn't do. Ah, the years I spent, raising
that vicious snake as my own sister, acting upon your orders—the lands I
wandered, gathering rare Prabandha pasurams, beautiful hymns and verses
that I taught her with such care! My soul burns when I think of what she is
—she refuses to even see me, now that she has become Pazhuvettarayar's
queen—”
“I am afraid your sorrow serves no purpose, Thirumalai—for such is this
world, and its people. We plan a great many things but in the end, well …
go on. What happened in Kadambur, next?”
“I trudged to Kadambur, certain that it was Nandhini in the palanquin and
revolving various ways and means I could either meet, or send an olai to
warn her, at the very least. I braved the greatest peril as I scouted around the

towering fort walls, and found a way to clamber into the palace grounds—
and that was when I stumbled upon a truly great mystery, a secret that
turned my world upside down—”
“You, Thirumalai, are easily the most aggravating man I have ever known.
Always, always you begin your tales this way and rouse us to fever-pitch,
but never do you reveal a single detail! What was this precious mystery,
pray?”
“Forgive me, thaaye—my natural hesitation in even speaking of such things
made me reticent. We have all supposed, thus far, that Periya
Pazhuvettarayar squires his young queen around, wherever he goes—but
that's not true at all. For it is not the Ilaiya Rani who travels in that closed
palanquin—”
“No? If it isn't the Ilaiya Rani, who else could it be? Another woman? Is
there no end to that old man's lust?”
“It—it wasn't a woman at all in palanquin, thaaye.”
“Not a woman? But what sort of man travels around in a closed palanquin?”
“Forgive me, Amma—but its occupant was none other than your only son,
Madhuranthaka Devar.”
Chembian Maadevi sat still for a few moments, startled and shocked
beyond measure.
“Dear god,” she murmured, to herself, finally. “Do I truly deserve such a
cruel punishment for my crime?”
Later, Azhwarkkadiyaan recounted the secret meeting that had taken place
in Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar's palace that night; the speeches made, and the
conspiracy hatched.
It is impossible to describe Periya Piratti's desolation and misery, as the
narrative progressed. “Ayyo, was it for this that I raised my son a pious
man, devoted to Siva Peruman? Must this be my reward?” she lamented.
“Must you be the reason the magnificent Chozha Empire falls to rack and
ruin? Must you be the cause of such infamy, the reason this ancient dynasty
reaps such misfortune?”

When she spoke, moments later, she had managed to compose herself.
“Visit me once more, before you leave, Thirumalai. I must think things
through—and consult with Kundhavai as well, about preventing this
disaster, somehow.”
“Far be it from me to suggest this, Amma—but you would do well to
preserve your own counsel, regarding these matters.”
“Surely you do not suspect even her motives?”
“It is only natural to do so. Isn't she, after all, Aditha Karikalar's beloved
sister?”
“What of it? Were you to tell me now, Thirumalai, that the sun rose in the
west and set in the east, I might believe you; my mind might even be
swayed by your forceful arguments that Thirumaal is the greater god and
Siva Peruman is naught—but not a word will I believe, against Kundhavai.
The palace midwife placed her in my arms the very instant she was born; I
have raised her ever since, with the greatest care and affection—even more,
perhaps, than my own daughter, had I borne one. She, for her part, returns
my love with all her heart; the dear girl considers me her parent and her
respect for me cannot be denied—”
“Permit me to ask you a question, Amma: did Princess Kundhavai ever
mention to you the fact that she visited the astrologer of Kudandhai?”
“No. What of it?”
“She did not recount to you then, of a certain young man she met there, of
Vaanar descent; nor that she ran into him once more, on the banks of
Arisilaaru?”
“She did not. But Thirumalai—these questions seem irrelevant. What is
their purpose?”
“That the princess harbours a secret not known even to you, Amma. That
young man, the Vaanar warrior, happens to be Aditha Karikalar's messenger
I warned you about—in fact, it wouldn't be amiss to call him a spy.”
“It matters not the least, Thirumalai. Even if, as you, say Kundhavai has her
secrets, and does not trust me with them—I have no doubt that she has her
reasons. I may as well give up my life, rather than doubt her!” announced
the illustrious Kandaradithyar's royal consort.

“Ayyayo! Pray do not even conceive of such an idea, Amma,” remonstrated
Azhwarkkadiyaan. “It may be that your trust isn't misplaced—indeed, I
hope it's so. Be that as it may, the Princess has expressed a desire to meet
me; I shall inform her that you wish to meet her, as well.”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 45

The Runaway Spy
Two thousand years ago, the Chozha king Karikal Peruvalathan raised the
banks on either side of the river Kaveri; they remained in excellent repair
and held the river in check for years. Then, for a period, the Chozha reign's
brilliance dimmed; their power diminished; others who had lain in wait for
just such a circumstance, such as the Pandiyas, the Pallavas, Kalappalas and
Vaanars rose to prominence. The Kaveri, stumbling without her Kaavalan,
her king, began to break her banks, shifting about without direction and
overwhelming the lands.
There were, of course, occasions when Kaveri did more than just wash over
fields—sometimes, she changed path altogether. And then, the river's
course often shifted drastically: Old Kaveri then became the New Kaveri,
and the reverse was true as well. So radically did the river's route change
that dry beds often transformed into nansei, or rich, fertile lands, while
depressions were altered into lakes, their waves lapping greedily at the
shores.
One such lake lay to the south of Pazhaiyarai's many Chozha dwellings, and
its proximity to the palaces made it one of its chief adornments.
Originally the result of Kaveri's periodical change of course, Chozha kings
had deepened the natural depression, widening its banks, and made sure the
artificial lake always brimmed with water. In addition to its beauty, there
was another advantage: the lake acted as a natural barrier, an immense
protection against outsiders encroaching upon the many royal residences
along its banks, particularly anthappurams. No one could cross over unless
by ferry, and even this was a privilege accorded only to those on familiar
terms with royalty.

Many were the beautiful uthiyaanavanams, or royal gardens that lined the
banks of the pretty lagoon; many, the royal ladies who promenaded along
their pretty paths, admiring the greenery, without fear of being spied on.
Here, they could discard their inhibitions, forget royal protocol and dance
like peacocks, or lift their voices in song, like nightingales. They could
descend into the water and swim about in its cool depths, or ply boats and
entertain themselves with playful games.
It was considered the norm, when a king embraced death and another
ascended the throne, for the new ruler to build a palace for himself, while
the queens and offspring of the departed king continued to dwell in existing
palaces.
Of all the royal palaces in Pazhaiyarai, next to Chembian Maadevi's
splendid edifice, it was Princess Kundhavai's royal residence that rose to
meet the heavens, awing subjects with its magnificence and exquisite
beauty. Had it not, after all, been Emperor Sundara Chozhar's seat once?
And now that the Chakravarthy had moved to Thanjai, his daughter reigned
supreme, in his place.
Of all the royal gardens that dotted the landscape, Princess Kundhavai's
uthiyaanavanam was, not surprisingly, the most beautiful. Luxurious
banyan trees grew along the many paths, their numerous vines anchored to
the ground; tiny bushes found a place, as well. Flowering creepers wound
their fragrant tendrils around sturdy tree trunks that curved in search of
sunlight, while cozy little arbours, covered with said creepers made perfect
niches to enjoy the landscape.
Kundhavai and her coterie of friends spent most of their evenings in these
luxurious gardens. Sometimes, they whiled hours together, laughing as they
traded choice pieces of gossip with each other. At others, they separated
into little cliques of two or three, sharing secrets amongst themselves.
Of late, though, it had become the norm for Kundhavai and Vanathi to
wander away into the gardens all by themselves. One such day found them
both in conversation under a shady banyan tree, swinging together upon a
creeper tied to one of its branches. The tinkling laughter of women vied
with the gentle, delighted notes of bird-song that fell from the trees around
them.

Kundhavai and Vanathi, however, saw no reason to laugh; neither did they
seem to relish the mirth of others, in the vicinity. As to the question of
whether they were sunk fathoms deep in talk—well, that was not true,
either.
A woman's voice rose in song from an arbour nearby. It was Kannan's
birthday, after all—and so she sang, naturally, about the blue-tinged god,
too.
The moon showers its gentle rays upon the earth, one night. The melodious
notes of Kannan's flute waft through the air, falling upon the ears of a
young woman. Her heart is lost to Him, and His musical notes wound her.
Wrung by despair, she sings her deep unhappiness—and a parrot, in a tree
nearby, tries to offer consolation:
Woman:
Who is this lout, that plays a flute?
Heartless, this painful moonlit night?
Alone am I, a maiden, yet no mate
Cruel, cruel, to thus scorn my plight!
Parrot:
He plays upon his flute, his notes so true
That the earth and skies may dance in bliss
Do they burn, my doe, pierce and taunt?
Such strange whims—pray, what is amiss?
Woman:
Welcome, welcome, my little bud –
Let me garland you, with pretty Punnai blooms,
For are you not here, as my spirit wilts
To console my heart; my soul, to soothe?
Parrot:
In truth I come from afar, fair maiden,
To speak of Kannan, who wanders, lovelorn,

In despair he sank, as you left his side,
Sweet butter now sours, once love was born!
Kundhavai shook her head, seemingly in despair, having listened to the
latter part of the song carefully. “A precious god our wonderful
Thamizhagam has been saddled with,” she remarked, once the verses came
to an end. “Plays upon his flute, gobbles butter by the pot and spends his
time romping with women! How on earth is anything worthwhile supposed
to get done, pray?”
No reply was forthcoming from her companion, which prompted
Kundhavai to turn to her. “Well, Vanathi? Why this silence? Surely
Kannan's beautiful flute hasn't turned you dumb as well?”
“Akka? Were you speaking to me?” blinked Vanathi. “What was it that you
asked?”
“What was it that I—good heavens, my girl, where have your wits gone
begging?”
“Nowhere, Akka. They've been here, with you.”
“Why, you little imp. Playing off your pretty tricks on me, are you? Your
heart isn't here at all, my child—shall I tell you where exactly it is?”
“If you're so certain, why not?”
“And why wouldn't I be? Isn't it on the battlefields of Eezham? Fluttering
around my young brother, that innocent young boy, scheming with ways to
snare him with your spells?”
“You are half-right, Akka—my heart does escape to Eezham often, I admit.
Not to ensnare him with my spells, though. All I can think about is how
horrifying the battle must be; how terrible the conditions he lives in, and—
how he must suffer, the wounds his body might have sustained—where and
how does he eat and sleep and oh! These are all I can think about. My mind
revolves endlessly around his sufferings in war—while I lie here on soft
cushions, dining off silver plates, on fine food, dressed in silks and gold! I
can barely stand it, Akka. If I had wings I would fly to Ilankai this very
instant —!”
“And do what? Be even more of a nuisance, I suppose?”

“Never. I shall emulate the ladies from our epics, Subadhra and
Sathyabhama—just as they drove chariots for their lords, Archunan and
Krishnan, so shall I, for mine. And when his foes fire their treacherous
arrows at him, I shall intervene and bear them upon my heart—”
“All of which courageous deeds he shall stand by and watch, I suppose?”
“Well—well, if such things aren't quite to his taste, then I shall await his
return, in camp. I shall anoint his wounds with rejuvenating salves and
unguents; spread soft mattresses for him to rest upon; prepare the finest
meals I can, to tempt his palate. I shall play upon my veena to soothe his
bodily pain, and sing, lulling him to sleep with my music …”
“None of this is ever likely to happen, Vanathi. You may as well reconcile
yourself to it. Chozha men do not let their women accompany them to
battlefields, ever.”
“Why not, Akka?”
“Because, my dear, they fear us women, far more than wounds!”
“But why? What could women possibly do, to them?”
“Nothing, of course—but what if our fearsome foes catch sight of your
exquisite beauty, fall at your feet and surrender in hordes? Our men
wouldn't have a chance to display their valour, would they? Chozha
warriors don't ever wish to be known as a tribe that lets their women win
wars for them.”
“Do such things happen, Akka? Truly? Are foes quite so silly as to
surrender at the sight of a pretty woman?”
“Well, why not? Vanathi, my girl—remember that young warrior we saw, at
the Kudandhai astrologer's home and later, on the banks of the Arisilaaru?”
“Yes. What of him?”
“The way he stood upon the threshold, as though drugged, at the very sight
of us? Do you remember that as well?”
“Indeed I do—but I beg to differ about his inebriated state at the sight of us,
Akka. If my memory serves me right, it was your exquisite face that made
him quite so giddy—he didn't even spare a glance for the others.”

“You've certainly learnt to spin fabulous tales, Vanathi. This isn't a joke at
my expense, is it?”
“No, never. Akka—I wish to ask you something. Will you promise to
answer me truthfully?”
“Let's hear this wonderful question of yours first, shall we?”
”Why were you thinking of that young warrior, just now?”
“Why, you brat! And why shouldn't I, pray?”
“Do, by all means—I never took you to task about that, did I? It's entirely
natural, in fact, that you should. I've been worried about him, myself. About
what might have befallen him, you see.”
“You have? Why would that be your concern?”
“No? But if we happen to meet someone, and think of him often—wouldn't
it be natural to wonder what became of him?”
“There's nothing even remotely natural about that. And we oughtn't to let
our wits wander in such chaotic fashion either; we must reign in our hearts
—hark, Vanathi! There's the sound of a parai—a public announcement!
What does the voice say? Listen carefully, will you?”
Indeed—a parai thudded loudly at a distance in the streets, interspersed
with human shouts. A little attention to the voice, and ah, this is what it
announced:
“An enemy spy entered the fort of Thanjavur with a counterfeit signet ring,
learnt royal secrets and has made his escape. Furthermore, this spy has
caused grievous bodily harm to two men as well, in his desperate bid for
freedom. A young man, well built, with the wits, and sly tricks of the asura
Indrajith himself, he is named Vallavarayan Vandhiyathevan. Those who
grant him refuge will be sentenced to death. Those who apprehend him and
turn him over to the authorities will receive a reward of a thousand gold
coins. Announced, hereby, as per the supreme authority of the Thanjai Fort
Commander, Pazhuvettarayar Kalanthaka Kantar!” The parai pounded
Dum! Dum! Dadum! in accompaniment.
Kundhavai Devi's slender frame trembled, for some reason.

“Devi?” A maid ran up, at that moment. “A Vaishnavite by name
Azhwarkkadiyaan seeks an audience with you. A very urgent matter, he
says.”
“I shall be there in a moment.” Kundhavai slipped off the creeper-swing and
hurried away.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 46

The Masses Murmur
Azhwarkkadiyaan's journey from Periya Piratti Chembian Maadevi's palace
to princess Kundhavai's royal residence took him through the streets of
Pazhaiyarai, and what he saw as he wove his way through the crowds, filled
him with delight. Today happened to be Kannan's birthday—ah, how
enthusiastic were this city's residents, as they indulged in celebration and
worship? There was no doubt, no doubt at all, that Vaishnavism was here to
stay in Chozha Nadu, and would only grow from strength to strength. As to
Saivism's own popularity, it would have been surprising in the extreme if it
hadn't occupied pride of place here: Chozha kings had been establishing
Siva temples around the country most diligently, in the last hundred years or
so; the songs of Saivism's three greatest saints were sung there often,
ensuring, thus, that they reached the people, for whom they were meant;
elaborate chariot festivals were held as well, resulting in a good deal of
celebration. All this, however, had not sounded the death knell for
Thirumaal or his fame—for Kannan, said to be the ninth and most complete
incarnation of Vishnu Murthy had so captured peoples' imagination; his
many adventures and divine leelai, indeed his life, played out in Mathura,
Gokulam and Brindavanam had made sure that he stayed in their hearts
forever. The Bhagavada groups that abounded here; the many street-plays
and the sheer number of artists intent on portraying Kannan's life—
Ammamma! Impossible indeed, to describe them all, for they seemed to
have multiplied since the last time we visited this fair city. The crowds they
collected at every corner, their thunderous applause and shouts of approval
added to the festive air and indeed, many more artists and actors were
trickling in steadily from the many villages surrounding the city, in the
hopes of just such audiences.
One such street-play group seemed to have arrived just that instant,
complete with a contingent that consisted of Vasudevar, Devaki, Krishnan,

Balaraman and Kamsan; their songs, dance and witty dialogues seemed to
be far superior to that of other groups, and seemed to have attracted more
attention than the rest, Azhwarkkadiyaan himself included.
Kamsan and Krishnan were engaged in a verbal battle at the moment and
the Vaishnavite paused to watch the fascinating performance. Played by a
young boy, Krishnan's many accusations against his ruthless uncle were
listed with an endearing lisp. “Come and fight me!” the child cried out,
finally—and Kamsan responded with appropriate outrage.
“Adei, you cunning little rogue, Krishna!” he yelled with a truly creditable
assumption of fury, voice ringing out like a peal of thunder. “Playing off
your pretty little tricks on me, are you? Ha—none of them will work! I shall
kill you now, you and your precious brother Balaraman and your father
Vasudevar. And see that Vaishnavite over, there, covered with sacred
naamam signs applied with sandalwood paste?—I'm going to throttle him as
well!”
The crowd gathered around the troupe glanced at our Azhwarkkadiyaan,
and began to laugh. The actors donning the costumes of Krishnan and
Balaraman darted looks at him as well. Quite a few members of the
audience sidled up to the Vaishnavite and began to cackle at him. “Kek-kekkek!”
A wave of anger slammed into Thirumalai at the blatant heckling; he
wanted, more than anything, to swing his staff at these idiots and deliver a
few choice blows—especially that ridiculous Kamsan. But what was the
point on trying to bash his head? None of his trusty blows would have the
least effect; Kamsan, in keeping with his costume, wore a wooden mask
with a horrifying moustache, and terrible teeth painted in a variety of garish
colours, over his face. All in all, using a staff on the people hereabouts
wouldn't exactly be appropriate at this time. Thirumalai shook his head and
regretfully, slipped away from the crowd. The man who played Kamsan,
though—how he had yelled his dialogues! Now, where exactly had
Azhwarkkadiyaan heard that voice? For he had heard it—of that, he was
sure. The question was, where? And whom did it belong to?
Mulling over these questions as he walked along the streets,
Azhwarkkadiyaan noticed something; a gradual change in the people he
was passing by. They appeared to have lost their recent enthusiasm—ah,

why were they dispersing so quickly? What had caused this sea-change?
Even the songs, dance and the melodious music had ground to a halt—
instead, everyone had gathered into little cliques and appeared to be
murmuring furtively amongst themselves. What were their secrets? And
why were they walking away so rapidly, discussion at an end?
Dadaal! Dadaal!—Really, why were doors being banged shut in such quick
succession?
The reason was revealed in just a few moments: the parai announcement
about a runaway spy that had set even Princess Kundhavai trembling.
So depressing was this unexpected proclamation that it quenched the city's
festive spirit at once. People looked pinched and drawn, staring
suspiciously at those who walked past them all alone, or even someone they
claimed no acquaintanceship with. Azhwarkkadiyaan himself was subject to
a good many doubtful stares by passers-by, who hurried past him the
moment he met their eyes.
Thirumalaiyappan guessed the reason behind this reaction, more or less; his
quick brain put together the subject discussed by these little, secretive
cliques he stumbled upon, by the roadside. Random words that fell upon his
sharp ears only served to confirm his suspicions.
For, all talk seemed to revolve around the wretched Pazhuvettarayars and
their tyrannical rule. But then—wasn't it entirely natural for the people of
Pazhaiyarai and the residents of villages in the city's vicinity to feel thus?
After all, hadn't the brothers been the means of removing Emperor Sundara
Chozha from his principal seat in Pazhaiyarai, to Thanjai? A King,
moreover, who had been immortalized by great poets, in verse, too:
“… Pazhaiyarai nagar Sundara Chozharai
Yaavaroppar ithonnilathe!”
Hadn't Pazhaiyarai steadily lost its lustre, with the Emperor's absence?
Surely it would be a dazzling city, radiant with festivities, had the Emperor
still been here: the many street-play troupes that entertained the general
public would have gathered, finally, in the royal courtyard; the
Chakravarthy would welcome them all and reward the many singers,
dancers, the paanars, actors and poets as they merited. Ah, wouldn't it seem
as though the whole of Chozha Nadu had gathered in this city to partake of

its delights? Every shop and stall would be deluged by customers and do
business a hundred times more than usual—and wouldn't the streets resound
with dance, song and silambattam performances when Venugopala Swamy
began His divine procession from the Nandhipura Vinnagara Temple, that
night?
Everything was ruined, now—by the Pazhuvettarayars.
This was not all: the good citizens of Pazhaiyarai nursed yet another
massive grievance as well: their beloved Prince Arulmozhi Varmar, more
dear to them than anyone else among the royals, was now away in Eezham,
fighting a desperate war; ten thousand men from the four Padai Veedu
settlements of Pazhaiyarai had accompanied him thither as well, braving the
wilds, terrible beasts, treacherous climate and wretched mountains, engaged
in upholding Thamizhagam's pride and valour, raising the standard of
Thamizh integrity high. Why, hadn't the young Velir of Kodumbalur
marched to Ilankai, heading an army himself, before taking a spear to his
chest and embracing death upon the battlefield? Hadn't the rest of his
contingent fought to the bitter end as well, gaining honourable deaths? And
here was young Prince Arulmozhi Varmar, leading his armies in Ilankai
right now, seeking to soothe their grieving spirits, fighting to uphold their
honourable sacrifice and ensure that the tiger flag flew high. While these
Pazhuvettarayars, symbols of wretched tyranny, were seemingly refusing to
send him food grains and clothes, money and weapons that would mean
their very survival! How unjust—had anyone ever heard of such things?
What on earth were all the enormous granaries in Thanjavur for,
overflowing with rice? What purpose, for that matter, did the treasuries of
Thanjavur, brimming with gold garnered from a hundred years of invasions,
serve? What use were money and grains that could not handed over to
Chozha warriors in their time of need? Surely the Pazhuvettarayars were
not about to bundle and hoist them on their shoulders upon their deaths, to
be carried to Yamalokham?
Such were the many mutters and murmurs among the people of Chozha
Nadu in recent times, and Thirumalaiyappan was well aware of them.
Pazhaiyarai's citizens had more cause than the rest to be dissatisfied: ten
thousand of the city's men might be fighting a war in Ilankai—but their
families, women and children resided here still, didn't they?

It was only natural, then, that the parai announcement about a runaway spy
and his apprehension, under the strict orders of the much-vaunted
Pazhuvettarayar brothers found little favour with them. Far from it—it only
served as an excuse for the city's residents to air their many grievances. A
spy indeed, many spoke amongst themselves. Which country is likely to be
brazen enough to send a spy amongst us—when the tiger flag flies high,
announcing its superiority from the river Vada Pennai to the tip of Kumari?
Which King would ever dare to slip in a spy into Chozha Nadu? No, this is
just another of the Pazhuvettarayars' clever ruses, should they ever take a
dislike to anyone, they brand him a spy and cast orders for his
imprisonment! Drag him straight to their famed dungeons, no doubt. Still,
these affairs are none of our business. These are powerful men, with the
authority to accomplish anything here, unjust or otherwise. Besides,
branding someone a spy means that no local-body, not even the town's
Panchayat will dare question them, doesn't it?
Thus did the good people of Pazhaiyarai murmur amongst their
acquaintances, discussing royal affairs in low voices—and
Azhwarkkadiyaan gleaned every bit of information he could with his trusty
ears, supplementing the rest with his keen intelligence.
Such things certainly boded ill, however, and even as Azhwarkkadiyaan
wondered just how things would end for everyone concerned, he found that
he had reached Kundhavai Devi's royal residence.
The Chozha princess had always evinced deep interest in conversing with
Azhwarkkadiyaan about worldly matters; the Vaishnavite had earned a
name for himself as a seasoned traveller, and many a pleasant hour had she
spent, enthralled, as he recounted his many adventures in the lands he
journeyed through. Keenly interested in learning about anything or anyone
new, the Ilaiya Piratti also enjoyed Azhwarkkadiyaan's recital of the many
Azhwar pasurams he had routed out and learnt with some difficulty. In
consequence, her welcome for him was always a pleasant one; she made
sure to enquire after him and his, her countenance pleasant and goodhumoured.
Today, however, the princess's features and speech seemed different.
Kundhavai's expressive face indicated that her attention was elsewhere; her

words, as she faltered uncharacteristically, revealed some agitation—a
marked departure from her usual, composed self.
“Well, Thirumalai? I hope I see you well,” she welcomed him. “And so—
what news? Why an audience?”
“I confess there seems to be no need for one, thaaye. Forgive me—but I
assumed you wished to converse with me, as is the norm, about various
worldly matters. Accept my apologies. I shall take my leave—”
“No, don't! Stay a while. I did wish to see you, after all—”
“It almost slipped my mind, thaaye—but I have just come from the Periya
Piratti's presence, and she bade me tell you that she had an important
message; she wished to meet you—”
“Certainly. I've every intention of visiting her, in any case. Before that,
however—do tell me about your journey: where have you been? What were
the places you visited?”
“Everywhere from Kumari in the South, to Vengadam in the North.”
“And—what did people talk about?”
“Most speak of the Chozha reign and its magnificence. Soon, they say,
Chozha dominions will stretch from the river Ganga in the North and even
the Himalayas; such is its power …”
“And —?”
“Much is spoken of the Pazhuvettarayars and their valour. The principal
reason for the Chozha Empire's present splendour and rapid ascendance,
they say, is the Pazhuvoor lords' dauntless courage and—”
“Enough. What else?”
“Your brothers are held in great esteem and affection. Prince Arulmozhi
Varmar, in particular, holds pride of place in their hearts; their love for him
has to be seen, to be described.”
“Hardly surprising, that. Anything more?”
“Many wondered why the Chozha Emperor's beloved daughter remains
unmarried, yet. I was asked this myself, often.”
“And what was your answer?”

“That the prince worthy of our beloved princess's hand hadn't yet been
born, in this world!”
“Upon my word —! Really, Thirumalai, if the prince who's to wed me is yet
to be born, I shall be a doddering old woman by the time he's a youth!
Enough of me now if you please—is there anything else, at all?”
“Why ever not? Many have expressed the greatest astonishment, for
example, at the news that the great Saivite saint, the most pious
Madhuranthaka Devar has entered quite abruptly, into the state of holy
matrimony—”
“Your sister—the one whom you claimed was destined to become a great
devotee of Thirumaal, a bhaktha sironmani like Andal—how is she, now?”
“What of her, thaaye? Isn't she now Periya Pazhuvettarayar's young queen,
mistress of his palace and all his wealth?”
“Not just his dominions, from what I hear—she's the dictator of the whole
of Chozha Nadu, isn't she?”
“So it's been said, thaaye—but why even think of her, on an auspicious day
such as this? Speaking of Andal, I must tell you that I sojourned at
Srivilliputhur for a while, and had the immense good fortune to learn a few
of Vishnu Siddhar's divine songs. Listen, Amma, to one of them—it deals
with the sacred occasion of Kannan's birth:
“Vanna Maadangal soozhthiruk Kottiyur
Kannan Kesavan nambi piranthinil
Ennai sunnam edhir edhir thoovida
Kanna mutram kalanthalraayirre!
Oduvaar vizhuvaar uganthalippaar
Naaduvaar nambiraan engutraan enbaar
Paaduvaargalum palparai kotta nindru
Aaduvaargalum ayitru aaypadiye!”
[Witness, fortunate ones, the joy of the birth of Kannan! For on this day, the
beauteous city of Thirukkottiyur, resplendent with many exquisite galleries
and maadams, devotes itself to celebration as oil and colours are strewn

about the temple courtyard. They jump and run about in delight, His
devotees; songs and music fill the air as they view their beloved lord—and
thus in their ecstasy, do we see Aypadi, before our very eyes!]
“Such is Pazhaiyarai too, this day, thaaye—just like the Aypadi of old.”
“Perhaps, but Thirumalai—didn't you hear another sort of parai, a few
moments ago? What was that all about, do you think?”
This, it seemed, was the moment Azhwarkkadiyaan had been waiting for.
“Ha, a spy—one who has escaped, too! They're offering some sort of
reward for his capture—but what do I know of such things, Amma?”
“Don't you? Not even a smidgeon of suspicion as to his identity?”
“A smidgeon, yes—but I daren't even whisper about it, thaaye. Did you
know—I was subjected to a good many hostile stares myself, on my way
here. What if someone suspected me, and dragged me off to the dungeons
—!”
“It would take extraordinary cunning to even get hold of you, Thirumalai—
they'd need men with horns, as they say, in our ancient tales! Tell me what
you know—but only if you truly wish to, of course. Surely you don't think I
might hand you over to the authorities?”
“Krishna, Krishna! Nothing of the sort. All I did was catch sight of a young
warrior in Veera Narayanapuram. He said he was on his way to Thanjavur.
Wouldn't say a word about his business there, but he did ply me with plenty
of questions—”
“Really?” Kundhavai sat up, abruptly. “What was he like?” Agitation
coloured her voice.
“Obviously well-born—even aristocratic, I should say. Certainly, a
handsome young man. Possessed of a keen intelligence and physical
strength—”
“What did he ask you?”
“About the Emperor's state of health, and who might succeed him upon the
throne. The prince who is engaged in battle, in Eezham. Later, I learnt that
he'd subjected the Kudandhai astrologer to the very same interrogation—”
“Ah! He did visit the astrologer, then?”

“Why, I do seem to recollect something about that visit—he practically
ploughed through the guard at the door and made quite the entrance, I
believe. But you, by good grace, did not know him for what he was—”
“My instincts were correct, then.”
“Pray, what about, Amma?”
“I sensed, somehow, that that rough-and-ready young man was ripe for
trouble …”
“And you were proven right. I suspect him to be the runaway spy, and the
one the Pazhuvettarayars have made a parai announcement for, in hopes of
capture.”
“Thirumalai—will you do me a favour?”
“Command me, thaaye.”
“Should you ever happen to meet that young man, at any time—”
“Shall I apprehend and him and claim my reward?”
“Not on your life! Bring him to me. You see—I have a commission for
him.”
Azhwarkkadiyaan stared at Kundhavai Piratti for a while, as though struck
with wonderment. “I don't think there will be any need for that, thaaye. I
shouldn't think I would have to seek him,” he said, finally. “For, you see—I
think he will find you, all on his own.”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 47

Eesana Siva Battar
His audience with Princess Kundhavai at an end, Azhwarkkadiyaan made
his way from her royal residence towards that of his elder brother, Eesana
Siva Battar, situated in the close vicinity of the Vada Metrali Siva Temple,
approximately half a kaadham away. It said a good deal of Pazhaiyarai's
splendour, that its dimensions and many of its magnificent landmarks could
be glimpsed on the journey from the royal palaces to the temple.
The Krishna Jayanthi celebrations had almost come to an end,
Azhwarkkadiyaan noticed, as he walked along the streets. Even more
surprising were the sights he witnessed as he strolled along homes, in
residential areas: women had gathered in little knots, and seemed embroiled
in furious discussion. Every one of them had garlanded a much beloved son
or husband with vanji flowers, wishing him victory in the Eezham
battlefield; certainly, every family claimed at least one courageous casualty
in the numerous wars Chozha kings had conducted in all four directions.
Theirs were the families now shrouded in gloom; the women murmuring
and muttering their woes in furious, dissatisfied tones. Where was all this
going to end? Thirumalaiyappan continued to walk, concerned.
Darkness had fallen, by the time he reached the temple. This indeed, was
the celebrated shrine Appar had glorified in his songs; in his time, it had
been surrounded by man-made hills riddled with caves and catacombs,
constructed with painstaking care for the benefit of Dhigambara Jain
monks, who conducted penances within. Today, there still exists a village in
Pazhaiyarai's vicinity called Muzhaiyur, to remind us of them.
Such muzhais or caves had risen high and completely concealed the Vada
Metrali Temple within when Appar arrived for a visit, having heard a great
deal about Pazhaiyarai's many splendours. The sight of the shrine
overwhelmed by Jain catacombs was enough to dismay Appar, who had

divined, with his superior powers, of the existence of such a shrine. He
made a plea, at once, to the then Pallava representative ruling the city, who
took swift action by destroying a few of the caves, thus exposing the shrine
again, to the public. Ecstatic, Appar sang at once, in praise of Siva
Peruman.
The Chozha kings, who ascended the throne later, took pains to renovate the
simple shrine into stone, thus adding to its magnificence. And yet, the caves
that surrounded the temple remained, almost like a thick madhil. Contrary
to the rule of four entrances to a temple, this one boasted of only one,
underneath its gopuram.
The easiest route to Eesana Siva Battar's home was through the Temple's
main entrance and across its precincts; the alternative was a circuitous route
that consumed a good deal of time.
Thus Azhwarkkadiyaan, stepping into the temple, on his way to his
brother's home. He glimpsed a few devotees at the sanctum—much to his
surprise, they seemed to be members of the theatre from earlier that day,
colourfully costumed as Krishna and Balarama. Ha, Azhwarkkadiyaan
thought to himself. Now, how did these people end up here, of all places?
Eesana Siva Battar hastened out of the sanctum even before Thirumalai
could complete his ruminations, grabbed his brother who had barely
stepped into the temple's threshold by the hands, and almost dragged him
outside.
“Why, Anna, what's this?”
“You wish to know, do you? I shall tell you, Thirumalai, and in such clear
terms that they will permeate even your very thick skull: I have decided,
henceforth, that our relationship is confined to the exterior of this temple.
You, my fellow, are a blaspheming, godless heathen—you who hate Siva
Peruman with all your soul and do not hesitate to display your deplorable
feelings for all to see! Your endless Siva nindhanai means that you do not
deserve to set foot within a Siva temple. I have been patient far too long,
Thirumalai, but I could not bear it any more—not after your despicable
speech in the great Queen's presence! You are welcome to haunt my home
and fill your disgustingly large stomach if you wish, but not a foot will you

set inside this sacred temple. Disobey—and I shall transform into
Sandeswara Nayanar himself —!”
“But, Anna—Anna!” Eesana Siva Battar caught his beloved brother by the
scruff of his neck and practically towed him out, seemingly in a towering
rage. None of Thirumalai's pleas moved him, and before his distraught
younger brother could go further, he had stalked back in and banged the
huge doors shut, drawing the bolt securely.
“So that's how it is, is it?” Azhwarkkadiyaan loitered in front of the temple
for a while, mumbling to himself. Then, he circled the whole precinct, Jain
caves and all, two or three times, taking care to start from left to right—to
do so the other way around might end in a proper pradhakshinam, or a
salutary circumambulation to the much-hated Sivan within—which the
fierce Vaishnavite could not countenance, at any cost. His painstaking
observation did reveal something to him: every one of the manmade caves
was closed. Later, he made his way to his brother's home, where he was
made heartily welcome by the good Battar's wife, who relished Thirumalai's
witticisms a great deal. The Vaishnavite did not disappoint: today, he was at
his sarcastic best, regaling her with thrilling accounts and jokes, and took
care to eat the Battar and wife out of house and home. His gargantuan
stomach finally filled and almost bursting at the seams with prasadham
from the Sivan Temple, Thirumalai belched, waddled to the thinnai and
sprawled upon it.
Somewhere between sleep and wakefulness, his mind wandered over the
happenings of the previous day—and lit upon one particular event,
alongside the river Kudamurutti.
Thirumalai was ambling along its banks, when horse-hooves thundered on
the banks opposite him. Quick to think on his feet, he slunk behind a thicket
of luxurious bamboo trees.
A horse careened on the banks, first, seemingly without direction; it seemed
drenched—from sweat or having swum across the river, Thirumalai could
not guess. A young man, almost a boy, was bound to the horse. He looked
frankly terrified—but underneath it all was a streak of determination, as
well. Four or five horses galloped up behind him, all bearing soldiers armed
with spears; they were nearing the runaway steed with every moment. One

of the men rose from his perch, his spear held aloft as if to throw it, but his
cohort leaned over and stopped him.
The boy's steed passed under a thick cluster of bamboo trees, at that
moment; one of the slender branches, already dropping towards the ground,
tangled up in his hair. The horse strained to move forward; the bamboo
branch yanked at the boy's hair. Just as Thirumalai shuddered at the boy's
fate, his pursuers galloped up and surrounded him. They took one look at
his youthful, pale features, and appeared overcome by surprise and dismay.
Pelted with their sharp questions, the boy stammered and stuttered his
replies, none of which were very audible to Azhwarkkadiyaan. “Where's
he? Where?” was a question repeated often, to which the boy sobbed and
heaved pitifully. “He's gone—the waters took him—the floods swept him
away!”
The men soon trussed up the boy, secured his horse and marched them both
long the banks.
None of this had made much sense to Azhwarkkadiyaan at that time—but
now, they seemed, finally, to reveal some of their significance.
In the midst of all this intruded the memory of the Balarama and Krishna
theatre troupe he had stumbled upon that day; in particular, the man
donning the costume of Kamsan, his face veiled by a wooden mask.
Something about his body language and speech had seemed vaguely
familiar. Now—now, he could see glimmerings of light, about the true
identity of the so-called actor.
The first thing Eesana Siva Battar saw when he returned home late that
night, upon the completion of the ardha jaamam poojai at the Sivan temple,
was his erstwhile beloved younger brother sprawled upon the thinnai.
“Thirumalai!” he called out. “Thirumalai!”—voice practically ringing with
fury.
Azhwarkkadiyaan moved not a muscle, feigning deep sleep. The Battar
gave him up as a lost cause, stalked into his home and banged the door shut
in a way calculated the rouse the street: Padaar! His raised voice within
even reached Thirumalai, lost as the Battar was in some sort of discussion.
It seemed to have developed into a verbal altercation—the subject of which,
Thirumalai guessed, was himself.

The next morning found Eesana Siva Battar accosting Thirumalai once
more. “When will you begin gallivanting about the country, again?”
“Once your anger has died down, Anna.”
“Do not call me that. You—I am no longer your elder brother and you,
certainly, have no claim upon me as my thambi—you blaspheming idiot!
Neechan—sandaalan—”
“Pray, why do you curse him so?” Battar's wife hurried up, quick to speak
up for her brother-in-law. “What has he done now, that he has not done
before? It is you who have turned into a Siva fanatic!”
“Quiet! If you knew what he spoke in the great Queen's presence yesterday
—Why does this Paramasivan, a mad ascetic dancing among skulls and ash
in a cemetery need temples, he asks! It was as though someone had poured
boiling hot lead into my ears—and I hear that Her Majesty did not sleep a
wink last night, the poor lady!”
“Thirumalai will repeat no such thing, in the future. Indeed, I shall make
sure he learns from his mistakes. And why would he not, as long as we
instruct him the right way?”
“Right and wrong ways, my foot! What he must do right away is journey to
Rameswaram and beg the pardon of the divine Siva Peruman, worshipped
by Rama himself, to wash away his sins. That, and only that will be the
means of his redemption. And until he does, I shall certainly never set eyes
on this heinous creature's face!” finished Eesana Siva Battar, in a
magnificent display of temper.
Thirumalai's lips twitched—with the overwhelming impulse to return every
one of his brother's taunts with interest, of course—but now was not the
time. Should he speak a word out of turn, all his painstaking efforts would
have gone to waste.
“Of course—why would he not?” butted in the Battar's wife, once again.
“He will be certain to obey any command of yours. Come to think of it,
would it not be an excellent plan to accompany him? So many years and not
a child of our own—doubtless, we have committed a grave sin that must be
remedied with worship. Thirumalai,” she turned to her brother-in-law.
“Why do we not all journey to Rameswaram?”

Eesana Siva Battar glared at them both, and stalked away. Some time later,
he confronted Thirumalai again—but this time, in a somewhat tranquil
frame of mind. “Our elders do say Kobam, Paapam, Sandaalam—anger
leads to nothing but destruction. And I am afraid I have given way to
wrath,” he admitted. “You have not taken my hasty words to heart, I hope?”
“Not at all.”
“In that case, stay here. I shall return once I have completed the midday
worship; there are a few important matters I wish to discuss with you, and
upon which I require your opinion. You will stay here, won't you?”
“I've no intention of leaving you—now, or ever, Anna.”
The Battar departed, satisfied.
Azhwarkkadiyaan stayed where he was, for a while. “So that's how it is to
be, is it?” he mumbled to himself a few times—and then left, abruptly. He
made his way around the Vada Metrali Temple and its caves twice or thrice,
making sure to conceal himself at the slightest hint of sound.
His wait was not in vain. Within a few moments, one of the entrances to the
Jain caves creaked open—and Eesana Siva Battar peered out. He stared
keenly in all three directions, before stepping out gingerly. Someone else
followed his footsteps outside—ah, now who might this be? By the look of
him, it certainly seemed to be the one who had earlier donned Kamsan's
costume. But who was he? Ha, so this was the reason for the Battar's
elaborate deception—his taunts and convoluted temper tantrums. Well,
well, well!
The men from the muzhai began to walk swiftly; Azhwarkkadiyaan was
careful to keep his distance, out of their eyesight, as he dogged their steps.
They walked for a while before reaching a quay—the one upon the artificial
lake that edged the royal residences, choppy with waves almost like an
ocean. But this one happened to be situated in the west, at a great distance
from the palaces.
The banks boasted a luxurious growth of thick trees; Azhwarkkadiyaan
slunk behind one, and peered out from behind two branches.
A boat bobbed upon the lake's choppy surface; it looked, upon closer
inspection, like a royal craft. A boatman waited upon the shores. The

moment he spied the Battar and his companion, he dragged the boat ashore,
in readiness for them, apparently. The men promptly climbed in.
Once the little craft began to float away, the Battar's companion turned
towards the shore. For an instant, his face was clearly visible—and
Azhwarkkadiyaan recognized him at once.
Not that the revelation came as a surprise; he had come to an accurate
conclusion as to the man's identity, by now. It was, in fact, none other than
the valiant young man he had met in Veera Narayanapuram, and on the
banks of the river Kollidam! Azhwarkkadiyaan had no doubt, moreover,
that “Kamsan” had been the very same warrior, as well.
All that remained, now, was to discern the secret assignation of these two
men—or, as Azhwarkkadiyaan swiftly amended himself, to confirm that his
suppositions regarding their destination was correct, of course.
Among the many palatial residences that lined the royal avenue, nearly
piercing the skies, one in particular, at the very end, lay silent and empty.
Once the honourable seat of Sundara Chozhar's Chief Minister, Anirudha
Brahmaraayar, the palace was now under lock and key: the venerable
minister was off on one of his many visits to see to royal affairs and
administration in Madurai, the Pandya capital; his family currently resided
in Thanjai, which meant that none remained to occupy his seat in
Pazhaiyarai.
It was here that Azhwarkkadiyaan finally made his way. Guards posted at
the palace's entrance bowed in deference at his arrival, and opened the
doors wide at his command. Once within, they closed and locked the doors
from the outside, as per his instructions.
Azhwarkkadiyaan crossed all three kattus or sections of the rambling palace
and reached the gardens, where he swiftly routed out a slender track that cut
across the luxurious bushes and many creepers that twined round each
other, glorying in the lack of a gardener. He walked steadily along the
narrow path until he reached Kundhavai's royal gardens, where he located a
cunningly placed alcove and hid himself, swiftly.
Judging by what followed, not a single one of his painstaking efforts were
in vain.

For something did happen—a dramatic event worthy of the poetic skills and
elegant verses of masterful bards such Mahakavi Kalidasa himself, and
many such others.
The boat crept along the waters, edging towards the shore; when it stopped,
Eesana Siva Battar and Vandhiyathevan climbed down from it, and began to
ascend the steps leading to the gardens.
At a little distance from the stairs waited Ilaiya Piratti Kundhavai Devi,
majestic upon a marble seat placed most artistically, in her garden.
The travellers ascended steadily from the shores; Princess Kundhavai rose,
the moment they reached the last step. It was then that Vandhiyathevan
raised his head and caught a glimpse of the gracious young lady.
He stopped short and stood still, transfixed at the vision in front of him.
A slender vine crept up just then, its delicate tendrils reaching between the
young man and Kundhavai, as though seeking to obstruct their view. A
beautiful butterfly, its dazzling, fragile wings fluttering in the sunlight,
alighted gently upon it.
Kundhavai bent her radiant, golden countenance a little, gazing at the
butterfly, entranced.
Vandhiyathevan, on the other hand, drank in her delicate, blooming beauty,
unable to even blink.
The lake churned with restless, foaming waves.
Birds in the heavens ceased their restless twitters. Time and space, it
seemed, stood still.
And aeons passed.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 48

Whirling Pools and Swirling Eyes
Aeons ago, God created the first man, the Aadhi Manidhan, who made his
home upon a mountain slope. Sturdy rock caves guarded him from wind
and gales; luxurious trees and foliage that grew thick upon the mountain
provided him with fruits that satisfied every one of his heart's cravings.
Beasts of the jungle lived in perennial fear of him; he himself, led a life free
of worry or fear, free as the birds that wheeled about in the sky. And yet—
yet, there seemed to be something sorely lacking. A yawning pit opened up
somewhere in the region of his heart—a deep yearning, a lack haunted him
every passing moment. He could not quite define it, but some sort of
mysterious force seemed to drag him in directions unseen, He seemed to be
seeking, at all moments, something he had neither seen nor experienced,
thus far. By day, he allowed his imagination full reign over this object he
sought; by night, his subconscious took over in the form of dreams. This
marvelous treasure that I seek—this luscious karpagakkani—this strange
force that tugs at me—how do I find it? When? The questions haunted him
day and night, and his heart fluttered, aching for some sort of reprieve.
Meanwhile, God had given form to the Aadhi Sthree, the first woman, the
same instant he created her male counterpart. She lived on the other side of
the mountain. Fruits from trees quenched her hunger; fresh water from the
mountain's sources slaked her thirst, and she lived in a cave that afforded
excellent shelter. In other words, she suffered no want—for all intents and
purposes. And yet, a fire burned deep within her, tormenting her every
moment; a mysterious force seemed to bind and tug her somewhere. But
where did it wish her to go? And why did it possess her spirit so? These
were questions she knew not the answer to.
A towering mountain thus separated the world's first man and woman—
preventing them from setting eyes on each other.

One day, the weather followed the vagaries of a scorching summer; a forest
fire began to rage through the mountain in all directions. So swiftly did it
cut across the vast swathes of vegetation, its tongue licking the plants and
trees, that the man and woman knew there was no hope of escape. None, at
least, through the jungle; the only way was to climb up to the summit. That
was where they caught their first sight of each other.
And stood completely still, hardly daring to blink.
Forgotten was the forest fire, and even the reason for their sojourn to the
summit. Gone was every instinct of hunger and thirst.
This. This was, they realized, the reason for their existence—to meet each
other, at this very instant. This, then, was the mysterious force that had
pulled and tugged at them. Within each other, they realized, lay the key to
their hearts; within themselves resided the only means to fill the gaping
emptiness that had made their lives miserable. And having found each other
—there was no force on earth, they realized, that had the power to separate
them.
High above in his celestial abode, Brahma Devar, who had observed this
magical meeting with some trepidation, realized that the good work had
begun—and returned to his divine duties, duly satisfied.
It would be safe to say that our Vallavarayan and Princess Kundhavai
resembled the first man and woman, at this very moment.
This was what they had sought, all their lives, whispered a voice, deep
within their hearts. This was indeed, what they had waited for; the meeting
that defined their very existence.
Unlike the Aadhi Manidhan and Sthree, however, princess and warrior were
bound by the dictates of their society and culture; neither could ignore the
difference in their respective statuses, which meant that they could not give
in to their newfound, rapturous feelings. Their eyes, however, played an
elaborate dance, sinking into each other one moment; shifting to flowers,
trees, butterflies and the lake nearby, the next.
Eesana Siva Battar, having decided that enough time had passed in silent
conversation, cleared his throat—which was when both realized that their
meeting had been convened for another, far more important purpose.

“I believe you petitioned Eesana Siva Battar to seek a private audience with
me?” the Ilaiya Piratti's voice held a good deal of severity.
Her authoritative tone, calculated to snub pretension, touched
Vandhiyathevan to the quick. He straightened to his full height in spite of
himself. “I am not sure I may volunteer an answer without knowing your
identity,” he returned, very much on his mettle. “I wonder,” he murmured.
“Has Eesana Siva Battar led me here erroneously?”
“Indeed, I am plagued by such doubts as well. Who was it that you wished
to speak with?”
“I requested the Battar to lead me to the Chozha dynasty's most lustrous
light; Emperor Sundara Chozha's Illustrious daughter; young sister to the
Crown Prince Aditha Karikalar; she who was born older to Prince
Arulmozhi Varmar; the Ilaiya Piratti Kundhavai Devi …”
“Well,” Kundhavai smiled a little. “It is indeed I who bear the crushing
weight of all those grandiloquent titles.”
“In that case—surely you aren't the young lady I met in the Kudandhai
Astrologer's home, and on the banks of the river Arisilaaru?”
“Yes, yes, guilty as charged, on both occasions, especially when it came to
my mannerless conduct. You didn't expect to meet such a socially inept
woman again, did you?”
“Hardly accurate to term this a second meeting, Devi.”
“Why not?”
“Such a thing would be possible only if there were a parting, in the
reckoning. But you—you were never far from my thoughts for an instant.”
“I didn't quite expect Thondai Mandalam's citizens to be such adepts at
conversation.”
“You prefer, it would seem, to heap all praise upon the noble Chozha Nadu,
and bestow none upon the pitiful rest.”
“I must confess that that is a crime often laid at my door—and with good
reason. But you don't seem to profess much affection for Chozha Nadu,
yourself.”

“Not at all. I like these lands very well—except for two great perils that
seem to accost unsuspecting men at every turn. A prospect that terrifies me,
I assure you.”
“Indeed, the swords and spears of Chozha warriors present a grave danger
to anyone. Foreigners would do well to exercise considerable caution.
Especially those with circumspect motives, such as spying, for example—”
“I beg pardon, but those weren't exactly the perils I had in mind, Your
Highness. I possess a trusty sword and spear myself and what's more, I am
even well-schooled in the art of their use—”
“How true!—ah, fortunate were we indeed, the damsels privileged to
witness your mastery in action, upon the banks of the Arisilaaru! Why, your
trusty weapon speared that hapless, stuffed crocodile with one swift stroke
—a stroke so sure that it tore open the cotton packed inside completely!”
“Ah, but then, Ammani, I must confess to ignorance about the brave
demeanour of Chozha Nadu's warrior princesses who shudder and quake at
the sight of a dead, stuffed crocodiles. I didn't know, moreover, that Chozha
warriors made a habit of attacking corpses; I believed the threat to be real,
and used my wits. Hardly my fault, or my spear's—”
“Entirely the fault of that stupid crocodile, I assure you. For it breathed its
last before brave Vandhiyathevar of the Vaanar clan could rip it apart and
send it to a glorious death, didn't it? It deserved its terrible fate. But stay—if
these weren't the perils you mentioned, what else?”
“The raging whirlpools in your rivers, as flashfloods thunder and roar into
them—never to be trusted. The bane of my very existence! I can barely
describe how they battered me senseless.”
“You—in a raging whirlpool? But you hardly seem the type to even set foot
in water, let alone dangerous flashfloods.”
“One cannot refuse to climb up a murungai tree, having wedded a ghoulish
Vethalam, as the saying goes. And it would seem that having set foot in
Chozha Nadu, getting snared in whirlpools and flashfloods is but a part of
everyday life. And all this, I tell, you because of a silly young man and his
idiotic principles—would you believe me if I told you that he refused to
utter a little lie?”

“This all sounds very mysterious indeed. Would you care to elaborate?”
“Why, so I will. The Thanjai Fort's Commander, Chinna Pazhuvettarayar
sent his men to capture me, branding me as a spy—me, your beloved
brother's messenger! I, however, had no desire to get caught before my
mission was accomplished; I beseeched the young man whose home I'd
stayed the night in, to escort me—”
“Where did you stay the night, in Thanjai?”
“In the home of a flower-seller, outside the fort. The poor woman was
mute.”
“Oh. And her name?”
“I must plead ignorance. But I do know her son's name. Sendhan
Amudhan.”
“I was correct, then. Proceed, please.”
“I took the lad up on my horse and set out towards Pazhaiyarai, when I
heard some of Pazhuvettarayar's men in pursuit of me. As I mentioned, I
had no wish to go to their prisons before I could accomplish my task; when
we arrived at the Kudamurutti, I instructed the young boy to carry on, upon
the horse, while I stepped down at this point. They will believe me to be the
rider and go after you in pursuit, I said to him. Once they have you, they
will realize their mistake. Should they question you about my whereabouts,
tell them I fell into the river and drowned! But that dratted boy appeared to
have been a direct descendent of King Harichandra himself. How may I lie
that you drowned, when you're no such thing?' he asked. And so, my lady, I
had to turn my lie into the truth—all for the sake of his testimony. I tied him
up to the horse well and good, and jumped headfirst into the river.
Ammamma—the whirlpools and treacherous swirls that haunt the waters by
the banks of these Chozha Nadu rivers! A terrible time I had, trying to
escape them and swim away to safety. In the end, I had to grab hold of a
sturdy tree root and haul myself, somehow, up to land. But Devi—what did
you think I saw, even as I was swirling around in those dangerous pools,
half conscious, fighting for every breath and aching for land? What were
my thoughts, do you think?”
“Pray, how may I know? Gajendra the elephant's divine salvation,
perhaps?”

“No, never. I saw kayal fishes in the waters, my lady, caught in the currents
and as helpless as I was. Those beautiful creatures, long, and sleek,
reminded me of the eyes of Chozha women. Even those strangled by
traitorous water currents may somehow make their escape—but a man
ensnared by a Chozha damsel's exquisite eyes and their swirling beauty, I
thought, may never free himself of their toils!”
“It's a common habit, I've noticed, to blame women and their beauty for the
mistakes and weaknesses of others; men, in particular are constantly guilty
of this crime.”
“Indeed, I freely admit my sins,” quipped Vandhiyathevan. “Why on earth
wouldn't I?”
The melodious notes of a flute wafted over to them, from within the palace.
Kinikini—Thandai silambu ornaments twinkled as feet danced upon the
floor, while the mathalam thundered its beats with majesty. The many
voices of young women rose in sweet harmony, as they sang an Aichiyar
Kuravai, a part of the many songs of that famed epic, Silappathikaaram:
“Kanru kunilak kani udhirtha maayavan
Indrunam aanulvarumel avan vaayil
Konraiyan theenguzhal kelaamo thozhi!
Kollaiyanchaaral kurunthositha maayavan
Ellainam aanulvarumel avan vaayil
Mullaiyan theenguzhal kelaamo thozhi!”
[Will you not know, my dear friend, of the presence of Maayavan who
draws the fruits from the trees in our groves, and enters our herds, by the
exquisite notes of his divine flute at his lips, like the sweet perfume of
jasmine and konrai?]
Kundhavai and Vandhiyathevan stood rooted to the spot, spellbound by the
song's beauty and devotion. Instruments began to play again: the mathalam
sounded its steady beat and anklets twinkled; a sign that the verses had
ended.

“The palace performs its Kuravai Koothu, no doubt,” ventured
Vandhiyathevan. “I had the fortune of witnessing one such in the Kadambur
Palace—not that they were the same, of course.”
“True; my companions learn their pieces even now. They will begin to look
for me soon—and now, what brings you here?” asked Kundhavai.
“As to that, Your Highness—I am happy to announce that I have
accomplished my mission, the task I set out upon, from Kanchi. Having
braved whirlpools, traitorous flash floods and betraying eyes, I bring you
this: your brother's olai to you, safe and sound.”
And Vandhiyathevan held out the palm-leaves with a flourish.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 49

Wonder of wonders!
Kundhavai Piratti received the olai Vandhiyathevan held out, and began to
read it. Her face, marred by a frown and clouded over until that moment,
began to relax. By the time she finished, her countenance glowed with a
golden radiance.
“Well,” she glanced up at the Vaanar warrior. “The olai is now in my hands.
What, now?”
“My task is done, Your Highness. I suppose all that's left now is to return
home.”
“Not at all. I should say, in fact, that your mission has only just begun.”
“I'm not sure I understand you, Devi.”
“My brother, the Crown Prince states here very clearly that I may entrust
any confidential assignment to you. Surely you aren't going to disregard his
assurances?”
“I did, indeed, accept such a commission from him—but I appeal to your
kindness: pray, do not burden me with missions of the utmost secrecy or
importance, I beg of you.”
“I'm afraid I'm the one who doesn't understand, now. Is it a common
practice among Vaanar warriors to accept a commission, and then withdraw
from carrying it out?”
“It's not in us to languish upon past laurels. Neither is it the Vaanar practice
to remove ourselves from previously accepted assignments.”
“Well, what then? Perhaps you nourish a wholesome hatred against all
womenfolk?” A pretty smile hovered about the Ilaiya Piratti's lips. “Or is it
just me you dislike cordially?”

Well, really. What sort of a question was this? Would the ocean ever
nourish a hatred for the brilliant chandran, hanging low in the night sky?
And if it should, why on earth would it ever try to reach for it with a
thousand of its limbs, the sea-waves? Who could ever claim that the blue
sky loathed beauteous Bhooma Devi, the Earth? Why else would it gaze
down at her every night, hope and longing mingling in its thousand
sparkling eyes, the stars upon the velvet sky? Could it ever be that dark
clouds held the dazzling lightning in revulsion? Why else did they wish so
desperately to clutch hold of a power that cleaved them in half, and hold it
in a close embrace? Did the bee ever loathe the flower? If so, why would it
hover endlessly around blooms? Would anyone ever believe it if the vittil
insect was said to abhor the gentle glow of a lamp? Else why would it fall
into the light and sacrifice itself? What a question indeed, Devi. Dislike
you? Why would your eyes, as they throw little glances in my direction,
paralyze me into a state of ecstasy, if I truly did? Why do you think that
tantalizing smile, at the edge of your lips, drives me to such madness, a
sweet, sweet torture I can barely have enough of …?
Such were the chaotic thoughts that chased themselves through
Vandhiyathevan's heart—thoughts that he could not, however, give voice to.
“You haven't answered my question yet, Ayya,” the Princess began, again.
“You believe, perhaps, that it's beneath the dignity of valiant Vaanar
warriors to carry out a mere female's commands? Didn't the Crown Prince
inform you of the contents of this olai, when he gave it into your
possession?”
“On the contrary, Devi—I was well aware of his express wishes and
everything my mission entailed, when I began. If anything, I'm inclined to
believe that I didn't quite start my journey at an auspicious moment. I
managed to make enemies all the way—I even had the supreme misfortune
of a bosom friend turn into a foe. They pursue me even now, in all four
directions. How may I carry out any task you may set me, under such
circumstances? That, in truth, is the reason for my hesitation,” explained
Vandhiyathevan. “I don't wish your commission jeopardized on my account,
after all.”
“Foes in pursuit, you say?” enquired Kundhavai, worry seeping into her
voice. “May I know who they are?”

“Well, the Pazhuvettarayars, for one thing—they've sent men in every
corner, in an effort to apprehend me; my dearest friend Kandamaran now
believes me to have stabbed him in the back; Azhwarkkadiyaan, a certain
fierce Vaishnavite fraud dogs my steps day and night. Not to mention the
fact that the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani has set a dangerous magician on my
tracks. I've no idea when one or the other of these will ensnare me, to tell
the truth.”
Memories of his encounter with the self-same mandhiravadi, the night he
escaped a watery grave in the floods accosted Vandhiyathevan, at that
moment.
Continuing his journey during the day was far too dangerous, he decided,
and had spent the hours skulking in bamboo forests and plantain groves;
choosing to walk steadily along the river banks once darkness fell.
Weariness overtook him sometime around the third jaamam that night, and
he decided to take his ease in a ruined mandapam.
The moon shone its pearly rays upon the earth, turning night into day; some
of its radiance reached even a little inside the crumbling edifice.
Vandhiyathevan moved beyond the light, and lay down in the shadows.
Sleep beckoned him. Even as he felt his eyes close all by themselves, he
was shaken awake, rudely, by a horrible screech very near him. An owl.
Hadn't he heard the same screech during his conversation with the
Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani, in her latha mandapam? Vandhiyathevan rose
hastily. Deep in the darkness, two tiny spots of light seemed to train
themselves on him. He backed away, and took two steps towards the
entrance—when the sound of footsteps stopped him.
Someone had just entered the mandapam.
Vandhiyathevan sidled behind a broken, ruined pillar and peered out. The
moonlight fell on the newcomer's face—and the Vaanar warrior realized
that he was none other than mandhiravadi, come to visit Nandhini.
Much to his surprise, the magician seemed to make the pillar his target;
Vandhiyathevan hoped that the man did not know of hic concealment, and
walk away.
His hopes were ruined. The magician, tiptoeing like a stealthy cat until he
reached the pillar, suddenly fell on Vandhiyathevan and clutched his neck

with a loud, inhuman shriek. “The signet ring!” he howled. “Give me the
palm-tree signet ring now—or I will strangle you this instant!”
Vandhiyathevan could barely breathe—his throat felt like being crushed in a
vice; his eyes startled out of his head as though they would pop out; he
heaved and panted.
And yet, somehow, he reigned in his panic. He caught hold of the old pillar,
gathered his strength, and threw out his leg in a mighty kick. The
mandhiravadi crumpled to the ground with a scream. The pillar chose to
crash that moment; stones and rubble began to rain down from the roof. A
terrified bat flapped its way out of the mandapam; so did Vandhiyathevan,
as fast as his legs could take him. Only when he was sure of no pursuit did
he stop, finally, catching his breath.
His legs shook, and body trembled even now, when he recalled that night.
“Ayya?” Kundhavai's melodious voice shook him out of his reverie,
somewhat, and restored his equilibrium. “How long has it been, since you
left Kanchi?”
“A week and a day, Devi.”
“Wonder of wonders, then, that you've managed to earn quite so many
enemies within such a short space of time. Pray, how did you accomplish
such a feat?”
“That would prove to be a very long story indeed, Your Highness.”
“You may recount it to me, nevertheless. My decision to entrust you with
another mission depends, you see, upon knowing every detail of your
journey, so far.” She turned to Eesana Siva Battar at this moment, and
called him aside. “The boatman—what sort of a person is he?”
“Deaf as a post in both ears. He wouldn't notice thunder if it tore his eardrums, thaaye.”
“Excellent. Shall we embark on a boat ride, then? We would do well to row
over the lake for a while; I wish to listen to his account in its entirety,”
remarked the princess, walking swiftly towards the boat.
A thrill of exhilaration coursed through Vandhiyathevan. On a boat—in
company of the illustrious Chozha dynasty's exalted princess! What had he

ever done to deserve this richness? He must have earned a great deal of
virtue in at least seven past lives, to be the recipient of such excellent
fortune! Now that the gods had seen fit to bestow such largesse upon him,
he would ensure that the boat-ride lasted for a very long time indeed—
Vandhiyathevan would describe his adventures in such terms, and with so
many endless paragraphs that it never came to an end. Never let it be said
that he ended a story far too quickly. Such strokes of luck did not always
find their way to people—where was the need for any hurry?
Vandhiyathevan's instincts may have been creditable indeed—but he had
reckoned without Kundhavai's own. The moment the boat began to glide
over the lake waters, and he began his account of the midnight conference
in Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar's Palace, the princess's impatience rose with
every passing moment. “Well, what next?”—“And then?”—“What
happened later?” she shot out the questions, barely able, it seemed, to sit
still. To his credit, Vandhiyathevan did use the considerable powers in his
repertoire and lengthened his tale as much as he could—but the longest of
them has to come to an end at some point, mustn't they? By the time he
finished, the boat had completed its circuit upon the lake, and returned to
the jetty.
It was obvious, even as they climbed down from the boat and entered the
royal gardens, that the Kuravai Koothu was still in full swing within the
palace; instruments played melodiously, accompanied by the tinkling of
Thandai anklets. A beautiful Silappathikaaram verse, set to an old tune,
wafted towards them, as well:
Periyavanai mayavanai perulagamellaam
Virikamala vundthiyudai vinnavanaik kannum
Thiruvadiyum kaiyum thiruvaayum seyya
Karyavanavi kaanath kannenna kanne!
Kannimaithuk kaanbaartham kannenna kanne!
Madanthaazhu nenjathu kanjanar vanjam
Kadanthaanai nootruvarpaal naatrisaiyum potrap
Padarndhaarana muzhangap panjavarkkuth thoothu

Nadanthaanai ethaatha naavenna naave!
Narayanavenna naavenna naave!
[What eyes are those that do not marvel at the great lord, the Maayavan;
He who holds the whole world upon a beautiful lotus, borne of his navel, in
a gentle clasp? What eyes are these that even blink, as they gaze upon his
feet, eyes and dark, divine form? What tongues are these that do not sing in
praise of the Great One who foiled the evil Kamsan's devious plans; who
went as an envoy from the illustrious Pandavas to the hundred Kaurava
brothers, to the glorious praise of thousands? What tongues are these, that
do not chant the blessed name, Narayana, at every turn?]
“Kanjanar might have been devious in his vanjam indeed, making terrible
plans to vanquish Kannan,” mused Vandhiyathevan, “But it can't be denied
that he performed me a signal service.”
“Did he, now?” the Ilaiya Piratti raised her eyebrows. “What might that
have been?”
“Assisting me in entering this city, of course,” he returned. Then, he went
on to describe the exact circumstances of his entry into Pazhaiyarai:
Vallavarayan had guessed, quite accurately, that the Pazhuvettarayars' men
would be lying in wait for him even before he arrived at Pazhaiyarai
himself, guarding every single point of entrance and exit into the city. The
least sign of suspicious behaviour, and he would be carted off to prison at
once. How on earth was he to enter the city, under these troubling
circumstances?
He stood mulling over this complex problem on the banks of the Arisilaaru,
some distance from the city's principal entrance, when he caught sight of an
approaching theatre troupe, complete with Kannan, Balaraman and
Kamsan, in their full regalia. Of these, the last-mentioned was the only one
to wear a curiously fashioned mask, as part of his disguise.
A fascinating idea began to take shape in Vandhiyathevan's fertile brain.
Sauntering over to the troupe, he engaged them in random conversation.
“Your precious actor, the one who's playing Kamsan—not very talented, is
he?”

Unsurprisingly, “Kamsan” took instant exception to his flippant comments,
and engaged Vandhiyathevan in a lively quarrel—and since when has our
warrior ever walked away from one? He snatched away Kamsan's mask and
wore it, in one audacious move. “Here's my challenge,” he crowed. “I'm a
far better dancer than you—and I shall prove it!” he yelled, flinging himself
about with abandon.
The rest of the troupe agreed, carried away with his theatrics, even going so
far as to say that Vandhiyathevan put on a much better show than their own
member. This seemed to be the cue for the original Kamsan to tear the rest
of his disguise and stomp away, disgusted and furious.
“Who cares about that idiot?' Vandhiyathevan shrugged, superbly. “I'm here
now—and I shall play Kamsan, if you wish.” The theatre troupe did so
wish, and bore him off promptly, delirious with joy at having found a true
actor.
Every song and dance at Pazhaiyarai's street-corners at a jubilant end,
Vandhiyathevan followed Aditha Karikalar's advice to the letter and met
Eesana Siva Battar at the Vada Metrali Temple. The priest bade him wait in
one of the Samana caves, before seeking Kundhavai Devi's permission for a
private audience. Once this was given, he brought Vandhiyathevan to her,
journeying upon the lake.
Kundhavai gazed at him, her exquisite eyes lovelier still, wide with
astonishment. “It appears to me that Kotravai, the Goddess of Victory
stands firmly by the Chozhas,” she murmured, a little awed. “Indeed, it is
her grace that has sent you to my assistance, in these times of peril!”
“But—I haven't been assigned a task yet, Your Highness,” protested
Vandhiyathevan. “Nor a perilous commission with which to prove my true
worth.”
“Fear not. The mission I have in mind is one that will make all your
previous threats seem nothing at all, in comparison.”
Vandhiyathevan felt his heart swell, his body quiver, with pride. Ah,
wouldn't he cross the seven roaring seas in this lady's service? Wouldn't he
engage in battle with a thousand lions and tear them apart without recourse
to a weapon? Even climb atop of the insurmountable Mount Meru and
pluck away the very stars in heaven, at a single wave of her hand?

In the midst of the royal gardens stood a beautifully wrought Vasantha
mandapam; it was to this marble edifice that Kundhavai next made her way.
The Battar and Vandhiyathevan followed her.
The princess reached into a tiny alcove; took out a palm-leaf and goldhandled quill, and began to inscribe the following message:
“Ponniyin Selva! Return home, the instant you receive this message.
More, you will know, through the bearer of this palm-leaf. You may trust
him implicitly.”
She signed this effusion with a tiny etching of a fig leaf, and handed it to
the Vaanar warrior. “You are required to leave, without a moment's pause to
Eezha Nadu; convey this message into the hands of Prince Arulmozhi
Varmar, and escort him home, personally.”
Vandhiyathevan's life, it seemed, was complete.
He stood still for a moment, buffeted by waves of sheer, unadulterated
happiness, hardly daring to believe his luck. One of the two greatest
ambitions, manoradhams he had cherished all his life, had just come true:
meeting the ancient Chozha clan's magnificent princess, Ilaiya Piratti
Kundhavai. And it seemed that his second would be achieved as well, by
virtue of her: soon, he was about to have the supreme good fortune of
meeting Prince Arulmozhi Varmar.
“A task my heart craves above all, Devi,” he murmured. “I shall take your
olai and set off at once.” And he stretched out his right hand.
The olai was duly given; Kundhavai's slender, beautiful fingers touched
Vandhiyathevan's fortunate ones, as she handed it over. A spark of energy
burst through his body; his skin prickled with goosebumps; his heart felt
like it might explode with ecstasy. A hundred thousand butterflies filled his
vision, dazzling him with their delicate, exquisitely fragile wings; a hundred
thousand nightingales sang a glorious song of rapture; fragrant blooms
descended upon him in veritable mounds, deluging him with colour and
perfume, scattering in all directions.
Vandhiyathevan raised his head; his eyes met Kundhavai's for a long
moment. A thousand words trembled upon his lips; his heart overrun with
emotion. And yet—what power had mere words, to express his deepest
feelings?

No matter. His eyes, it seemed, were able to perform this office for him,
more than adequately. What they communicated to the Princess at that
moment—the splendid poems they recited, the magnificent verses they
extolled—ah, not even Kalidasa, great bards, or the ancient composers of
epics such as Muthollayiram, might have accomplished any such. What
more can be said, then, of their beauty?
Salasalasala … dry leaves rustled somewhere in the distance, outside the
Vasantha mandapam. Eesana Siva Battar cleared his throat.
And Vandhiyathevan came back to earth with a thud.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 50

The Paranthakar Infirmary
The sun's rays bathed the wide streets of Pazhaiyarai the next morning,
flooding them with light; the golden domes atop the city's splendid royal
palaces dazzled with its red-gold brilliance.
A lavishly decorated elephant, resplendent with an ambari, made its
ponderous way towards the front entrance of Kundhavai Piratti's palace.
The princesses themselves walked out of the palace within moments, onto
steps meant for ascending such mounts, and made themselves comfortable
upon the elephant. The animal began to stalk its way with its precious
burden, thundering through the streets lined with various Padai Veedu
settlements, towards the Paranthaka Chozhar Infirmary. The mahout took
matters into his hands at once and soothed the elephant, upon which it
moderated its speed.
Tinkling bells that heralded the arrival of the royals was enough to have the
doors of various homes slammed open, and their residents to hasten towards
the street. Their faces beamed as they encountered the princesses, and
folded their hands with deference.
The avenues were swiftly crossed and soon, the elephant had arrived at the
Padai Veedu settlements—which presented a vastly different picture from
other residences of the city. Plump, well-fed roosters crowed all over the
place, seeking combatants for a quarrel; rams, bearing their sturdy, curled
horns proudly seemed to strut about, as though sending out a proclamation:
Who amongst you is willing to lock horns with me? Ferocious dogs that
seemed capable of ripping anyone's throats were bound to the entrancepillars of homes with ropes and strips of skin; little boys pranced through
the streets, battling their peers with strong bamboo staffs; ‘Sadasada,
padapada!’ went the sound of their sticks as they slashed at each other,
practicing the martial art of Silambam.

A good many of the homes displayed vibrant kaavi paintings upon their
thinnai walls; for the most part, these seemed to be the many adventures of
Muruga Peruman, or Chozha Emperors themselves—and even so, war and
battle dominated the scene: Muruga Peruman chopped away head after
countless head of Soora Padmasuran in one panel, while Durga's execution
of evil Mahishasuran was illustrated in full and terrifying detail in another.
Other walls glorified the many valorous exploits of Chozha warriors in the
battlefields
of
Thellaaru,
Thanjai,
Kudamooku,
Arisilaaru,
Thiruppurambiyam, Vellore, Thakkolam, Sevur and many more such.
The princesses' entry into the Padai Veedu settlements, upon their elephant,
was the signal for the streets to break into pandemonium. Roosters flapped
their wings, highly incensed, and flew to the protection of the roofs;
children called out to one another and ran to their homes, banging on their
doors to inform their families of their royal visitors.
“Long live Ilaiya Piratti Kundhavai Devi!” Women, children and the elderly
lined the streets in front of their homes as the princesses went past,
showering them with joyous blessings. “Long live Sundara Chozha's
illustrious daughter!” Some chose to follow the elephant and soon, this
gregarious crowd grew ever larger, echoing with various blessings and
chants.
We have mentioned previously, that the residents of the Padai Veedu
settlements also numbered, amongst them, the women, children and parents
of those soldiers presently in Eezham; Kundhavai had taken it upon herself
to establish an infirmary for their benefit, from the funds of her own
numerous landed property. The Chozha clan derived great pride in extolling
the names and deeds of their forebears; the princess was no exception.
Amongst her ancestors, one of the greatest was undoubtedly her
grandfather's father, Emperor Paranthaka the first, and she had named her
Infirmary after him. It was her custom to visit it often, and to enquire after
the health and well-being of the families of various soldiers, settled there.
The elephant stopped in the vicinity of the Infirmary; it bent its forelegs
first, then, its hind legs. The princesses descended carefully. The mount's
departure was the signal for the general population—comprising mostly the
women and children—to surround the royal ladies at once.

“The Infirmary is of benefit to you, isn't it?” enquired the princess. “Do the
physicians dispense their medicines to those in need, every day?”
“Indeed, yes, thaaye,” rose several voices in answer. “They do!”
“I suffered from a terrible cough for three months, Devi,” recounted a
woman. “The Vaidhyar's medicine cured me in a week.”
“My willful son climbed a tree, fell and broke his leg, Amma,” said another.
“Our physician splinted his limb and bade him take medicine for fifteen
days. His leg is now healed—he runs and plays about with his usual spirit.
He has even begun to climb trees again!” finished the relieved lady.
“My mother's vision has suffered for a while now, Your Highness. She
visited the Infirmary for a whole month, and took her medicines,” related
one young woman. “I am happy to say now, that her sight is as well as
ever!”
“Hear that, Vanathi?” murmured Kundhavai. “Ah, how enlightened were
our ancestors! I wonder how they ever divined the precise herb that could
cure a certain ill?”
“Undoubtedly, they must have had the benefit of their second sight,” was
Vanathi's response. “How else could they have learnt all they did?”
“It might be true that they've discovered medicines for almost every
physical malady—but alas, that they shouldn't have found a single remedy
for those such as you, who pine away from mental afflictions!” mourned
Kundhavai. “Now, what do you believe can be done about that?”
“Pray, Akka—kindly cease talking about my mental illness—it's no such
thing! My friends tease me mercilessly as it is—”
“And that's as it should be, for you deserve every word of it. You've turned
my own brother's head, haven't you? The poor boy used to enjoy the luxury
of a carefree existence—and now he sends messages enquiring about your
health through every envoy from Ilankai!”
Abruptly, a shout reached them: “Way! Way for the Vaidhyar! Way!”
Guards cleaved a path through the surrounding crowds, and the most senior
of the physicians presiding over the Infirmary arrived, to welcome the
princesses in state.

“You mentioned, I believe, certain wonderful herbs to be found in the
forests surrounding Kodikkarai, didn't you, Vaidhyar?” asked Kundhavai. “I
sent you a young man who might undertake a journey there and back—did
he arrive here?”
“Indeed, yes, thaaye—that quick-witted youngster came yesterday, in
company of the Eesana Siva Battar. I have formed the intention of sending
my son with him, as well. My boy shall return from Kodikkarai, while your
soldier appears to wish to journey to Ilankai as well—”
“Do we really need herbs from as far as Ilankai?” wondered Vanathi.
“Certainly, my lady—you do know of the tale from Ramayana, where the
powerful Anumaar flew over the seas, bringing the Sanjeevi hills to save
Lakshmanar's life—and it's said that some fell out of the mountain and onto
the forests of Kodikkarai during his flight, which is why we still harvest
such wonderful herbs from there. Since the Sanjeevi Hills were themselves
in Ilankai, in the first place, it is only to be expected that the best of herbs
could still be found there. Should I manage to find the herbs I need, Devi, I
swear that I shall cure all the Emperor's ills myself, without doubt —!”
“May it be so, by God's grace. And so—where are those young men, now?”
“Within, Amma—and in readiness for their journey, upon your word.”
The princesses entered the Infirmary, escorted by the Chief Physician,
taking in the sights of those waiting in the corridors for their medicines, and
those who had already had that felicity. Every one of them beamed at the
sight f Kundhavai Piratti, vowing and declaring their gratitude for their
princess's kindness in setting up such an infirmary, for them.
Two men awaited the ladies within the physician's room; one was
Vandhiyathevan who, Kundhavai noted, amused, had dressed himself in the
latest of fashions with the utmost care. Even Vanathi seemed to recognize
him. “Why, Akka,” she whispered into her companion's ears. “It does seem
to be that young man from the Kudandhai Astrologer's home, doesn't it?”
“So it would seem,” Kundhavai's tone was bland in the extreme. “What's
more, he's visiting the Vaidhyar after barging into the home of an astrologer.
Perhaps the poor man suffers from some hideous mental affliction, like
you?” She turned to Vandhiyathevan. “You, Ayya, are the warrior who is

willing to undertake a journey to Ilankai to bring back herbs to soothe the
Emperor, I believe?”
Whatever incomprehensible language Vandhiyathevan's eyes and lashes
may have chosen for silent communication, his lips took recourse to the one
in vogue among humans. “Indeed, yes, Your Highness. I'm on my way to
Ilankai, it's true—and I may even have the felicity of meeting the Prince. Is
there a message you wish me to convey to him?”
“Why, so there is. Kindly inform the Prince, should you ever meet him, that
the Kodumbaloor Princess suffers grievous physical maladies; she swoons
often and stays unconscious for hours on end. Should the Prince ever wish
to see her in possession of her wits, he ought not to pause an instant in
Eezham, but come home at once!”
“By all means, Ammani,” and Vandhiyathevan turned his attention to
Vanathi.
Kundhavai's flippant words threw Vanathi into a morass of confused
bashfulness; her beautifully chiseled features glowed, their exquisite
loveliness enhanced, if that were even possible. She blushed painfully,
striving to master the embarrassment that threatened to overwhelm her. “KKindly do not convey any such message, Ayya! If you must, do tell—do tell
him that the Kodumbaloor Princess dines four times a day, dresses and
revels in the kind hospitality of Ilaiya Piratti Kundhavai, if you please.”
“By all means, Ammani,” promised Vandhiyathevan.
“Well, upon my word! You've heard both our messages—yet, you assure us
that you will deliver them faithfully! Surely only one of them can be true?”
“What of it, Ammani? My duty is deliver the messages of both the plaintiff
and the defendant—it's the Prince's responsibility, as the judge, to decide
upon the veracity or otherwise of the statements,” finished Vandhiyathevan,
with aplomb.
“But don't, I beg of you, confuse the messages with those who gave them!”
put in Vanathi.
Kundhavai turned to the Vaidhyar, apparently feeling that the conversation
had gone on long enough. “Have you received the palm-leaves to be given
to these men, from the palace's Thirumandhira Olai Official?”

“Of course, thaaye. I received two, to be accurate. One carried a general
message: These envoys are engaged upon a mission to secure herbs for the
wellbeing of the Emperor; government officials upon their path are to
render whatever assistance necessary, in accomplishing their task. The
other was addressed specifically to the guardian of the lighthouse at
Kodikkarai,” explained the Vaidhyar. “Both are in the possession of these
young men.”
“Excellent. I see no reason for them to tarry, then,” said Kundhavai. “Surely
they may leave at once?”
“Why, certainly,” assented Vandhiyathevan.
Easier said than done, however.
The whole cavalcade exited the Infirmary. The royal elephant stood in
readiness, its ambari prepared to allow the princesses to mount. Two
stallions, brought over from the palace stood ready as well for the
messengers, fleet-footed as the wind, fairly twitching for a gallop.
And yet—it did not seem as though everyone concerned would begin their
journey at once. Vandhiyathevan, for instance, seemed to be beset with a
veritable plethora of doubts that had to be assuaged that very instant;
Kundhavai, for her part, seemed to be plagued by a thousand perils that
might endanger her messenger, and of which she thought it best to warn
him. In particular did she instruct him about the dangers he might be
expected to encounter, upon his journey.
The princesses ascended their royal mount.
Vandhiyathevan and his companion climbed onto their horses as well.
The elephant cherished no desire, it seemed, to move; Kundhavai indicated,
with a sign, that it might be prudent for those who were to travel the longer
distance to start.
Left with no further pretext to dawdle, Vandhiyathevan turned his horse—
with a great deal of reluctance, it must be admitted. He craned his neck and
gazed at Kundhavai one last time, eyes fairly brimming with eagerness and
yearning.
Then, abruptly, he delivered a slap to his horse, as though furious with it;
that well-bred animal sprang forward, quite unused to such cavalier

treatment. It sped away, kicking up a cloud of dust; the Vaidhyar's son had
to gather all his considerable inexperience just to follow him.
Kundhavai fell into a reverie as the elephant made its ponderous way back
to the palace. Strange indeed, the vagaries of the mind, she mused. Why did
her conscience, that had rejected kings among kings, and the greatest of
warriors with a flick of her finger, take such pains over an ordinary man?
Why did her heart worry so much about his fate, and hope upon hope that
he would succeed in his perilous mission …?
“Such deep reflections, Akka,” Vanathi's voice intruded upon her thoughts.
“What are they, may I ask?”
“Nothing worth the mention, my dear. If you must know, I was wondering
about that conceited young man, and why on earth I must needs choose him
to send a message to my brother—”
“Indeed, Akka, you're very right. A vastly troublesome fellow, I thought.
Even a master thief, if I might say so—”
“A thief, you say? But why?”
“Well, thieves usually make away with such useless things as silver and
gold in the ordinary way, but this one seems a vast sight more dangerous—I
fear, very much, that he wishes to steal Chozha's Nadu's most precious deity
in his capable hands!” twinkled Vanathi. “Surely you won't let such an
eventuality come to pass?”
“Why, you insolent little brat,” exclaimed Kundhavai, without heat. “So
you think me the same as you? Not on your life, my girl!”
As the elephant progressed along its way, its occupants noticed a great
many women congregated upon the street, at one point. Kundhavai halted
their progress at once, and leant out. “What is it?” she enquired. “Do you
wish to apprise me of anything?”
“There has been no news until now of our men in the Eezham battlefield,
thaaye,” one of the gathered women took a step forward. “Is it true that the
Thanjavur authorities have prevented rice and grain from being sent to
them? But how will they survive without food in those harsh conditions,
Amma?”

“There's no cause for concern, I assure you,” soothed Ilaiya Piratti. “No
matter what those in Thanjavur scheme about, be aware that our soldiers
receive their sustenance from the ports of Maamallapuram. Surely your
beloved Prince wouldn't let his valiant men starve, when they're
distinguishing themselves for the sake of Chozha Nadu?”
At any other time, the princess would have stayed longer, in a bid to
assuage their lacerated feelings—but she wished for solitude now, battered
and buffeted by strangely unsettling emotions.
The elephant marched on, towards the palace.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 51

Maamallapuram
We now wish our readers to make a journey to a seaport they are
undoubtedly well-acquainted with: Maamallapuram.
Three hundred years have passed since Mahendra Pallavar and his
illustrious son, Narasimhar Pallavar transformed the rather drab harbourcity into a fantasy land of unimaginable beauty with wonderful, life-like
sculptures.
These days, the port has lost some of its earlier splendour and dimmed, in
consequence—an unwelcome change that sinks our hearts. Mansions and
palace lie in a protracted state of dilapidation, the noble edifices crumbling;
the streets and harbour no longer thrive with crowds of people. No more do
the great warehouses exist; no more do we see mounds of wares and
produce littering the sands, ready for import and export.
We have seen, earlier, that the sea made its way inland, forming a deep,
natural canal that facilitated ships to enter and berth themselves with a good
deal of ease. Now, however, sand had silted into the canal a good deal over
the years, which had turned shallow; small crafts and canoes were the only
one that could find their way in, perhaps; larger ships and boats would have
to stay moored much further away, in the open sea, and goods meant for
export would have to be loaded onto smaller crafts would have to be
transported to them.
It must be admitted, though, that despite this general dilapidation,
Maamallapuram had also acquired a few merits: in particular, the temples
on the shores of the beach, that capture our heart and eyes with their
indescribable beauty. These are unlike those carved out by Mahendran and
Maamallan out of sheer rock, but have been constructed piece by piece,
with rocks sourced from elsewhere, and seem to sparkle like wondrous

crowns that adorn Samudhraraja, the Ocean King. Adada, one is bereft of
words indeed, when it comes to describing the astounding form and beauty
of these creations!
There is, in addition to the above, a charming Vinnagara temple in the midst
of the city, dedicated to the Lord who Guards the Three Worlds as he
reclines upon his snake-bed. This noble edifice, we learn, was renovated by
the devout Parameswara Pallavan, he who considered both Saivism and
Vaishnavism as twin halves of his soul, and as dear to him as his very sight.
Thalasayana Perumal, who graces his devotes here, was visited by
Thirumangaiyazhwar himself, who prostrated himself at the lord's feet and
sang hymns, overcome by a veritable deluge of devotion. We may deduce
from his songs, in fact, that the Pallava samrajyam was a thriving,
flourishing empire even in his times, judging by the many riches and
splendours mentioned in them:
“Pulankoll nidhikkuvaiyodu
Puzhaikkai kalitrinamum
Nalankoll navamanik kuvaiyum
Sumanthengum naanrosinthu
Kalangal iyangum mallaik
Kadal mallaith thalasayanam
Valangoll manathaaravarai
Valangoll en mada nenje!”
A hundred years have swept by since the saint sang his songs; the Pallava
samrajyam is no longer so, and the sun of its magnificence has set a long
time since. Kanchi, once known as peerless in learning, has lost its claim to
that title as well; even Kadal Mallai, once famed for its commerce and
trade, seems dimmed.
Time may have marched on and left its indelible mark on the city, but in
one aspect, Maamallapuram remained almost unchanged: Time, for all its
prowess, could not ravage the port-city's beautifully wrought sculptures and
carvings. Images sculpted among the many rock faces; the temples and
vimanam-chariots carved out of the boulders dotting the landscape stayed in
the same, pristine condition they had once been, three hundred years ago,
when they had first been carved. These days, more crowds thronged the

lands to glimpse these marvels of human creation, than merchants to deal
with the humdrum business of trade.
A beautiful chariot, designed to represent a vimanam and harnessed with
two blood stallions, rattled along the wide avenues of the city, in great style.
The well-decorated horses, intricately carved and embellished chariot, not
to mention its roof, overlaid with gold and glinting in a way that rivaled the
evening sun, were indicative of the fact that its passengers could not be
anything but royal.
And so it proved to be—the three seated within the chariot were indeed
royals. One, warrior among warriors was Sundara Chozhar's firstborn,
Aditya Karikalan, a man who had proven himself by venturing into
battlefields at a remarkably young age, performing a great many valorous
deeds and earning a reputation for himself as a battle veteran; who had
faced Madurai's Veera Pandiyan himself in war, defeated him, hence
earning the distinguished sobriquet, The Kopparakesari Who Beheaded
Veera Pandiya. Almost immediately after one of the Chozha dynasty's
greatest enemies had finally been routed out and the Pandiyas safe under
their authority, Sundara Chozhar had fallen prey to illness; this prompted
him to announce formally, without any further ado, that Aditya Karikalan
was the heir to the throne, and he duly performed a Yuvaraja Pattabishekam
to enforce the edict. Aditya Karikalan was authorized from that day on, to
make grants as he chose and style himself as the Crown Prince, on his own
stone inscriptions.
The next few years saw him proceed to the northern lands hotfoot, with the
praiseworthy intention of routing out Kannara Devan of the Rettai
Mandalam kingdom, and freeing Thondai Mandalam from his clutches.
Great were the valiant deeds he performed here as well, and his battle
exploits were many, as he trounced his foe, sending him in retreat well
beyond the northern banks of the Vada Pennai. All these ferocious martial
activities did mean, however, a frequent replenishment of his resources;
Aditya Karikalan made camp often in Kanchi, gathering together men,
weapons and equipment necessary for warfare. It was at this point that the
Pazhuvettarayars began throwing obstacles in his path; further battles along
the northern front would only be possible, they proclaimed, once the war in
Eezham had concluded. Other rumours began to float in as well, on the
questionable activities of various people: it was learnt, later, that the Chozha

forces in Eezham had not fared any better than their northern counterparts;
food from Chozha Nadu had not reached them, and they suffered from its
lack.
All these and more had served to turn Aditya Karikalan into a morass of
fury and indignation, his warrior heart thudding in agony.
Certain momentous events occurred in the three hundred years before and
after the time of our story; Thamizh Annai, the great mother, gave birth to
men and women who carved a place for themselves in history with their
ideals; accomplished such remarkable deeds of valour that they eclipsed
heroes of epics and ancient legends. Warriors, the likes of Veeman and
Archunan, Dhronar and Bheeshmar, Gadothgajan and Abhimanyu
appeared, and performed wondrous feats that stunned the world; each of
their accomplishments in battle only seemed to add to the strength of their
shoulders. Men advanced in years possessed the strength to break entire
mountains with their bare hands; youngsters not yet of age seemed able to
journey to the heavens upon the winds, and pluck the very stars from their
black depths.
Two such warriors now accompanied Aditya Karikalan, occupying pride of
place beside him, as he travelled in his chariot. One was Thirukkovilur
Malayaman; lord of Malayamanadu, the name of which had, over the years,
shrunk to Maladu. Often was it referred, in popular usage, as Miladu, which
explained another title of his, namely Miladudaiyar. Sundara Chozhar's
second queen Vana Maadevi happened to be his much beloved daughter,
which made him Aditya Karikalan's grandfather as well. The years had
sharpened his intellect and added wisdom, while not lessening his physical
prowess in any way, thus likening him to the Kauravas's much revered guru,
Bheeshmar himself. Great as the faith Aditya Karikalan had in this revered
old man's insight, it cannot be denied that his old-fashioned theories and
long-winded advice did, sometimes, test his patience sorely.
The last of the trio was Parthibendran. A scion of one of the branches of the
ancient Pallava clan, he was slightly older than Aditya Karikalan himself.
Lacking a throne to occupy, his only ambition was to distinguish himself in
the battlefield with a great many courageous exploits; he had attached
himself to the crown prince, as a result. His talent had made him the right
hand of Aditya Karikalan in the decisive battle against Vira Pandiyan; it had

earned, in consequence, the warrior's respect, and a staunch, intimate
friendship. Ever since the fall of their hated foe, the two had become boon
companions.
Rattling along the streets in state, their conversation, such as it was,
revolved almost entirely around news from Thanjavur.
“I will not stand the Pazhuvettarayars' high-handedness an instant more, I
tell you! They cross all bounds with each passing day. How dared—how
dared they brand my personal messenger a spy? The sheer audacity of it!
And to announce all over the city that he carries a bounty of a thousand
gold coins upon his head? How do you think I can stand outrageous
behaviour such as this?” Aditya Karikalan thundered. “My sword shrinks
within its very scabbard with embarrassment—and here you are, counseling
me to be patient!”
“Quite the contrary—but then, I did warn you to reconsider sending
Vandhiyathevan, of all men, on a sensitive assignment such as this,” came
Parthibendran's dulcet tones. “I knew that rash idiot would wreck and ruin it
with his impulsive acts. A royal mission requires swift thinking and sharp
intellect—and certainly needs something more than just being able to
brandish a sword and spear, after all—”
The Pallava prince, it must be admitted, was neither a great admirer of
Vandhiyathevan, nor of the crown prince's obvious partiality for him. Never
did he miss an opportunity to point out that young man's faults, and took
care to level criticism at everything Vandhiyathevan did. His reaction at this
juncture, therefore, came as no surprise.
“Didn't take you long to begin against him, did it? You've never been able
to rest in peace unless you've managed to rage against Vandhiyathevan at
least once,” groaned Aditya Karikalan. “And as for wits—who else might
be suited best for a mission such as this if not him, I ask you? How does he
lack for sense? My orders to him were to deliver my olai to the Emperor
somehow, and he managed to carry it out. And that's why the
Pazhuvettarayars are furious—where's Vandhiyathevan's fault in all this?”
“In not acceding to your commands, strictly,” sniped Parthibendran. “I've
no doubt he went above and beyond your instructions, poked his nose into
what wasn't his business and managed to anger them in some way.”

“Oh, be quiet. Thatha, why this profound silence on your part? Reveal your
opinion, I beg you. What do you say to our gathering all our forces,
storming Thanjavur and rescuing the Emperor by ourselves? Why not bring
him to Kanchi? How many more days must I sit still, forced to watch those
wretched Pazhuvettarayars guard my father like a prisoner?” growled
Aditya Karikalan, plainly furious. “Just who do they think they are? And
how much longer am I supposed to spend in mortal fear of them?”
Thirukkovilur Malayaman-Miladudaiyar, veteran of sixty-four blooddrenched battles, cleared his throat, preparatory to speech. By this time,
however, the sea was well within their sight; white-tipped waves crashed
onto the shore. “Let us alight from this chariot first,” he ventured. “We shall
make ourselves comfortable at our usual place, shall we, and speak to our
heart's content? For, I am getting on in years, thambi, and find it quite
uncomfortable to speak in a rattling chariot, you see.”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 52

Old men, and Marriages
Small boulders dotted Maamallapuram's seashore in plenty. Sometimes, the
sea would pound upon them with its massive waves submerging them
completely; at others, the tide would recede, revealing them to the sun, and
affording time for them to dry out a little. Not a single one of them had been
left alone by the great sculptors of the port-city to spend eternity as faceless
rocks; each had been turned into an exquisite work of art, large or small,
depending on their size, and now decorated the shores, never to be marred
by the elements.
Aditha Karikalan and his companions approached two such boulders, facing
each other, and alighted from their chariot. Karikalan and Malayaman
seated themselves one each of the rocks, obviously meant to be thrones fit
to welcome kings, while Parthibendran stood apart. The sea sent its waves
often over to them, washing their feet and reaching up to their calves.
Sometimes, droplets of water splashed onto their faces as waves crashed
over rocks, pearls showered over them by the ocean. Row upon row of
boats cleaved through the water at a distance, carrying various produce and
goods meant for trade. A good many of these were carefully removed from
said boats and carried aboard large ships that lay further out to sea, their
enormous sails unfurled against the wind.
“When I think of all the equipment and goods gathered so painstakingly for
the Rettai Mandalam invasion being carted away wholesale to Eezham ...”
murmured Parthibendran. “I can't stand it—my whole being burns!”
“Well, what else can be done, pray?” demanded Aditha Karikalan. “The
best of Chozha warriors have been sent to Eezham, and they're heaping
victory upon victory on battlefields, showering us with accolades. Why,
they've actually managed to capture Anuradhapuram, pride of those
Eezham rulers and their principal seat for a thousand years—you know it

always managed to dance away from our grasp—and hoisted our flag there!
Do you truly want warriors of such mettle to starve?”
“Not starve, no—when did I ever say that?” retorted the Pallava prince. “Of
course, they must be sent food grains—but from the Chozha port at
Nagaippattinam. Or Sethukkarai, perhaps, in Pandiya Nadu. What's the
necessity of carting them all from these drought-ridden, arid Thondai lands?
Especially when we're on the point of setting out towards Rettai mandalam?
That, you see, is my objection—that we're forced to kick our heels just for
the sake of sending them essentials.”
“Precisely—I can't bear to sit still, either. And I fail to see what those
dastardly Pazhuvettarayars are hoping to accomplish with these acts!”
fumed Karikalan. “How long are we supposed to put up with these state of
affairs? Thatha,” he turned swiftly to the old man, “Do open your lips and
tell us what you think—why this blessed silence, anyway?”
“These waves crash ceaselessly onto the shore, thundering all over the
place, my child—and your friend adds his bit, screeching above them,”
pronounced Malayaman Miladudaiyar. “How am I supposed to compete
with them? I am getting on in years, after all.”
“Do be quiet for a while, Parthibendra, and let Thatha give us his opinion,”
instructed Karikalan.
“Witness my lips seal this very instant!” retorted Parthibendran. “After all,
Thatha, my poor grandfather, has had a great deal to bear—having to ooze
at a snail's pace from his rock-fort in this doddering old age, just to meet us.
My deepest sympathies for his efforts; of course, how dare I open my
mouth in his venerable presence? This sea, now—mannerless creature that
it is, dares to rave, rant and throw itself about just as it chooses, right in
front of him! There seems to be no one capable of taking it down a peg or
two,” he shook his head. “Why—it's almost as though the Ocean King fears
the Malai Nattu ruler not at all!”
“And yet, thambi, Parthibendra, there was a time when he did,” the old man
answered calmly, choosing to disregard this speech. “A time when the kings
and emperors of this land shook at the mere mention of Thirukkovilur
Malayaman—when rulers of vast lands, such as the Chalukyas of Rettai
Mandalam, the Vanagovarayars of Vallam, the Gangars and Kongars

slithered away into their holes like snakes at the peal of thunder! Why, even
Samudhrarajan, the King of Oceans knew his place and stayed subdued—
but now, now that this feeble body of mine reveals its years, they've seen fit
to shed their fears, and show their true colours shamelessly. As for those
wretched Pazhuvettarayars of the West who seek to route me out—not on
their lives! You mentioned a moment ago, didn't you, Karikala, that you
were unaware of their true motives? Listen to me, young man, and I shall
reveal it to you: their intentions are none other than to cause a rift between
you and your brother. Their heinous objective is to weaken each of you
separately, and ensure that you never join hands. To make certain that
Arulmozhi Varman tastes bitter defeat in the wars at Eezham and to
humiliate him; that you, therefore, develop a hatred of him and treat him
with contempt. Then, of course, nothing else would do for the both of you
to want to rip each other's throats out, whereupon, this old man would be
reduced to utter misery … and this is what they wish—”
“Then they'd be certain to taste defeat, Thatha,” Karikalan interrupted,
before Miladudaiyar could finish. “I've no intention of quarreling with
Arulmozhi—in fact, I would give my life for him, if ever the need arose.
Speaking of which … sometimes, I wonder if I oughtn't to board a ship and
leave for Ilankai myself—what difficult straits might my brother not have
been reduced to, in those wretched lands? And meanwhile, here I am, with
nothing better to do than eat and sleep myself into a stupor, in my pretty
palace. My spear and sword rust in their place, and each moment seems to
me an aeon! I can barely sit still here. Tell me, Thatha—may I board one of
those vessels on their way to Eezham now? This very instant?”
“What an excellent suggestion, Your Highness,” exulted Parthibendran.
“Now this—this is more like it! You've merely given form to my own
intentions, this many days. And not a moment more to lose either; let's
leave at once. There's no point in asking Thatha—he's bound to counsel you
to squat on your haunches and wait. Don't decide anything on impulse,” he
mimicked the old man. “Let's leave tomorrow—we'll round up half of our
Thondai Mandalam men, march to Ilankai, finish the war one way or the
other, and then disembark at Nagaippattinam,” he shot out his plans like
water spluttering in boiling oil. “And then we'll descend like a ton of bricks
upon those blasted Pazhuvettarayars and give them a hiding —!”

“You see what he says, Karikala? I warned you right at the beginning, didn't
I? Now you know why I swore I wouldn't say a word unless this one kept
his mouth shut, don't you?”
“As you wish, then, Thatha—I've shut up,” Parthibendran snapped. “And
you're free to speak your mind. Whatever that may be.” And he closed his
lips with his palms, in an elaborate gesture.
“You, Karikala, are a warrior among warriors—there haven't been many of
your ilk even in these brave Thamizh lands, famed for their courageous
sons. As an eighty-year-old, and a veteran of many, many huge battles, let
me tell you, my boy—I've never even seen anyone like you, who dared to
plunge into the battlefield all by himself, hacked away at his enemies and
emerged triumphant. You were barely sixteen, when you entered the Sevur
battle—and never have seen such as I did then, watching you wade through
blood and gore, destroying your foes, you sword swinging now right, now
left, dismembering and decapitating at a rate that heads simply rolled,
everywhere! Why, I can see you still, if I close my eyes …” he paused. “So
is your friend; a great warrior in his own right. And yet, the two of you are
far too quick to anger, and as for your impulsiveness—this, exactly is why
you fail at your tasks. You fail to think things through, and end up doing the
opposite, the very thing that will serve your purposes the least—”
“You've given us this very piece of advice at least a thousand times,
Thatha.”
“And it has yielded absolutely no results—is that what you wish to say? Or
perhaps you want me to leave for my home without another word?”
“No, not at all. Tell us, please, what must be done next.”
“Send forth, right away, for your brother Arulmozhi; make sure that the two
of you are never separated an instant—”
“What on earth—what sort of advice is this? And what of the war in
Eezham, pray, if my brother comes here?”
“The war, my boy, has now reached an impasse. Our troops have, at long
last, captured Anuradhapuram, just in time for the rains, I might add, which
will last for four months, and during which time, nothing can be done in the
way of an invasion except to retain what we've captured. A task, I am sure,
our commanders are more than capable of undertaking. It is vital that

Arulmozhi be here at this very moment, Karikala—I see no point in
concealing the truth from you, anymore: the Chozha Empire that Vijayalaya
wrought into being with blood and sweat is under threat of collapse any
moment; it is imperative that you and yours stay together at this dangerous
time, and keep safe. We ought to do all in our power to gather our forces,
for there is no supposing what peril we might find ourselves in, at any time
—”
“But—Thatha, what's all this nonsensical talk? What's the need for me to
fear anything, as long as I have my trusty sword in my hands? And what
does it matter if we're in the very thick of danger, anyway? I can take care
of myself—surely there's no foe on this earth I can't defeat, no peril I can't
face by myself—I need no one's support …”
“Spoken like a true warrior, Karikala—and there's no need to remind me of
your valour; haven't I just said that I know you, my boy? And yet, there's no
harm in casting our minds to that great saint, Thiruvalluvar, and reflecting
upon his wise words:
“Anjuvathu anjaamai pethamai anjuvathu
Anjal arivaar thozhil!”
Cowardice may be despicable, lad, but there's something to be said for
entertaining a healthy fear of that which is worthy of it. Quivering in your
place during war, when you're facing the enemy is contemptible—and if I
ever have the misfortune of being saddled with a boy of that kind in my
family, I shall cleave him in two with my own sword, in my old, trembling
hands, bereft of their legendary strength, without a moment's regret! But of
other things, my boy—such as treachery, and appalling plots hatched in the
darkness of souls filled with hatred, and conspiracies that threaten an
Empire—these, you must and should fear. And take steps o protect yourself
from grievous harm. Those in the direct line of succession to the throne,
who will one day rule the country, must be especially cautious during such
times; there's no room or place for indiscretion, or carelessness.”
“But—what are these inexplicable perils that you keep harping about? Only
if you share them with us in detail, Thatha, will we be able to guard
ourselves against them —”

“Certainly I shall—I was about to, anyway. A few days ago, the
Sambuvaraiyars played host to a mysterious midnight meeting at their
Kadambur Palace; from what I can see, quite a few big names were there—
Periya Pazhuvettarayar, for instance, and then Thennavan Mazhavarayar,
Kunrathur Kizhaar, Vanangamudi Munaiyarayar, Anjaatha Singa
Mutharayar, Rettai Kudai Rajaliyaar … these were the names I could
gather. A good many others may have elected to be present as well—”
“Why, so they might have—what of it? Doubtless, they watched songs and
dance far into their precious midnight meeting, ate until their stomachs
burst, drank gallons of liquor and stumbled off to their beds in a stupor.
How does all this affect us? All these men you mentioned, grey-haired and
white beards that trail around their feeble waists in their dotage, what on
earth do you think they can accomplish, with their whispering campaigns?”
“Considering your confirmed opinion of old men and their feebleness,
Karikala, there doesn't seem to be anything more to be said. After all, I'm
getting on in years myself; far, far older than any of those I mentioned—”
“Pray don't be offended, Thatha—would I ever dare to class you with those
doddering idiots? Do tell us what happened next.”
“Ah, there you go again, implying that we cannot even fend for ourselves!
Do not forget, my prince, that the feeble old man who heads them did, after
all, enter wedlock just some time ago. Do not forget, Karikala, that there is
nothing more dangerous than a young man who has married in his old age!”
A strange expression flitted across Aditha Karikalan's face at the very
mention of said old man and his wedding; his eyes grew bloodshot, staring
stark, as though a ferocious goddess, a dark spirit thirsted for blood; his lips
trembled, and the sounds of his teeth grinding were almost audible.
Malayaman, intent on his story, noticed none of this; Parthibendran could,
and did.
“Need we talk of all that now, Ayya?” he intercepted, at this moment. “Why
don't you relate what happened next, at the Sambuvaraiyar palace?”
“I was about to—but I am, as you so kindly said, getting old … my mind
wanders so much these days that I went on to something else. Now listen,
Karikala—Parthibendra, you must, too. The meeting I mentioned was

attended not just by old, doddering men, but a few youngsters as well. One
of them was Kandamaran, Sambuvaraiyar's son. The other …”
Karikalan was quick to notice the pause. “Well, who was it?” he prodded.
“Who, Thatha?”
“The beloved son of your elder grandfather, Kandaradithyar. None other
than your Chithappa, Madhuranthaka Devan!”
Parthibendran and Karikalan stared at him for moment. The next instant,
they broke into merry peals of laughter.
“But—what is it that I have said?” Miladudaiyar asked, querulously. “What
do you find in this to amuse you? Or perhaps you are laughing at me again
—”
“Not at all, Thatha—pray don't take offense. We found it hilarious that you
chose to refer to Madhuranthakan as a ‘youngster!’ Isn't he, after all, even
more elderly than all of you put together?” gurgled Karikalan. “The very
symbol of pious old age, surely?”
“You have heard, I know, of youth returning to old men, at times. It looks
like the years have rolled back, for your uncle too. Until some time ago, he
was touring around the country, mumbling about renouncing the world and
devoting himself divine service and Sivan—but now, he's married wives
one, two and three at a steady rate, I see.”
“Well, and so he may, with my goodwill. He can go on gathering wives into
his harem, for all I care. What of it?”
“But that is the problem, thambi. You see, none of his marriages are affairs
of the heart; they are political, all of them, and carried out at the behest of
those treacherous Pazhuvettarayars, to further their conspiracies —!”
“I see no need for beating about the bush any more, and these mysterious
tales of plots and betrayals, Thatha. Do step right out into the open: what do
those Pazhuvettarayars wish? What on earth is behind their tours of the
land, and these precious midnight conferences? What do they hope to
accomplish with their silly little Madhuranthakan?”
“Nothing much, I am afraid: merely to place Madhuranthakan upon the
Chozha throne, and ensure that neither you nor your brother inherits this
Empire,” announced the old man in stentorian tones. “It is to this effect that

they have almost imprisoned your father within the Thanjai fort—to secure
his approbation for their heinous plan!”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 53

Malayaman's Fury
It might have been true that the last, terrifying declaration uttered by
Thirukkovilur Malayaman—as famed for his intelligence as his integrity,
and equally renowned for his wealth of worldly experience—did not quite
have the effect of sending Crown Prince Aditha Karikalan into a deep
swoon … but came quite close to it. The young man sat in his place,
dumbstruck, and quite unable to do anything else. Beside him stood
Parthibendran, gaping like a landed fish. Even the sea appeared to have
quieted down for a brief while, and as for the vigorous chants of “Elelo!”
from the men engaged in transferring goods from small-craft to the ships—
even those seemed to be in abeyance, for now. All was silence.
Abruptly, Aditha Karikalan raised his head and stared at his grandfather,
shaking himself out of his astonishment and feeling a flicker of
embarrassment at having even given way to it, in the first place. “I've heard
of such rumours floating around cities, yes—but I've never given any
credence to them, so far. You seem to be so very certain of your news …
can such a thing even be possible, do you think?”
“Why not?” queried Miladudaiyar. “Have you forgotten who ruled this
Empire before your grandfather? Wasn't it your grandfather the elder,
Kandaradithya Devar? And who else might be said, pray, to have more right
than any of you boys, to rule this land?”
“No—never—not on your life! Whom do you think deserves the privilege
of ruling this land? An absolute and ineffable fool—someone who can't
string together four words to a sentence—cannot even grip a sword in his
hands—who ought to have been a woman, but was born a man by a
grievous error on nature's part—that one? Or a warrior among warriors who
entered the Sevur battlefield at the tender age of twelve—the lion who
beheaded Vira Pandiya with a single stroke of his sword—who has never,

until this moment tasted defeat in any form—to Aditha Karikalar?”
Parthibendran's words shot out like a volley of arrows. “My much revered
and respected Miladudaiyar—have you finally and completely taken leave
of your aged senses?”
Aditha Karikalan suppressed him with a few sharp, well-placed words, and
turned to his grandfather. “This empire doesn't really matter much to me,
Thatha—my sword is capable of earning ten such realms, for me. Pray, tell
me, though, how law and justice stand, upon this matter. Had I been told
right at the beginning that Madhuranthakan deserved to inherit the throne, I
wouldn't have minded at all, but now that I've been declared the Crown
Prince and my Yuvaraja Pattabishekam carried out in full view of this land
and people—how can anyone expect me to just relinquish my claims?
Would you truly to agree to such a course of action?”
“I would not—not now, not ever. Should you ever decide to bestow this
empire on Madhuranthakan yourself, in a fit of benevolence, my first
instinct would be to cut you into a hundred pieces with this sword of mine
—and then, I shall seek the woman who bore you in her womb for ten
months, and scatter her flesh to the winds! And then I, I who brought your
mother into this world—I shall kill myself with my own bare hands! Never
—not until my body holds its last breath shall I allow this ancient Chozha
kingdom to pass into anyone's hands but yours!” Miladudaiyar's faded eyes
gleamed with the spirit of his growled speech; his aged, withered body
trembled with the force of his emotions.
“Hear, hear! That's as it should be—wonderfully spoken, Thatha!” And
Parthibendran practically sprinted towards the old man and folded him into
a hearty embrace, eyes overflowing with tears.
Karikalan spent a few moments in silence, staring at the sea. “If that's truly
your intention, Thatha,” he began, finally, “why wait? Let's gather our
forces and march towards Thanjai wholesale; descend on those dastardly
Pazhuvettarayars and their cohorts—Mazhavarayar, Sambuvaraiyar,
Mutharaiyar, Munaiyaraiyar and the rest; vanquish them in one stroke and
capture the fort; bundle Madhuranthakan into prison and free the
Chakravarthy. All we need, Thatha, is your blessing—for who on this wide
earth can defeat me and Parthibendran, as long as we're together?” This, in
a voice fairly brimming with pride and confidence.

“Not in direct combat, perhaps—but what about stealth and treachery? How
would you withstand attacks from invisible enemies? The moment you
approach Thanjai with your forces rumours will start flying around of war
imminent between father and son! Why, they would even spread around
word that Chakravarthy left this world, unable to bear such terrible tidings.
And there would certainly be those ready to believe such horrible untruths.
What then, child? You would falter—for, would you be able to bear the
heinous charge of gathering forces against his own father?”
“Siva Sivaa,” Karikalan clapped his palms over his ears. “I can't—no!”
“There it is, then. That is what I meant, in the beginning, when I warned
you that grievous peril—abaayam—surrounds us. ”
“Suggest some sort of ubaayam, then—a ruse to escape these terrors.”
“Send a loyal messenger to Ilankai, first, and bring forth your brother
Arulmozhi. He will not, I am sure, be so unconscionable as to leave behind
his own men or the battlefield; someone must be sent, who possesses
extraordinary powers of persuasion; the skill to present the situation and
change his mind—”
“If you will permit it, Ayya,” Parthibendran stepped forward. “I should like
to go, myself, and carry out this task.”
“That is as may be; you and Karikalan may decide upon a course of action
yourselves. I must insist on this, though: whoever you choose, eventually,
cannot afford to behave like Vandhiyathevan, interfering in affairs not of his
concern—”
“There!” crowed Parthibendran. “Hear that? What did I tell you?”
“Have you heard any news of him, Thatha?” enquired Karikalan.
“I must confess that I almost suspected him, once, of having joined our foes
—but later, I decided that there was no foundation for my doubts. For they
proved to be groundless.”
“Now what do you say?” Karikalan challenged his friend, in turn.
“Pray, let him finish—there's no point in interrupting. Ayya, what sort of
suspicions did you harbour against Vandhiyathevan, and how did you
manage to absolve him of any complicity?”

“I learnt that he was present in Sambuvaraiyar's palace, the night of the
midnight meeting—but I understand he had no part to play in any of those
great men's machinations.”
“But—how did you know all this?”
“For one thing, I never received an invitation to grace the Kadambur feast,
and that set my nerves on edge. I acted on my instincts, waylaid Kunrathur
Kizhaar, who was returning home from the celebrations, imprisoned him in
my mountain fort and questioned him carefully, upon which he divulged
that Vandhiyathevan and Sambuvaraiyar's son Kandamaran were friends—”
“True indeed—they shared guard duty on the banks of the Vada Pennai, part
of our armed forces, didn't they? I know that their friendship dated from
those times—”
“However that may be, it was clear that the boy had been within the palace
when the conspiracy was discussed, but I knew not the way to discover if he
had been a part of it. Later, I absolved him of any blame, when I learnt that
he had escaped the Thanjai fort, having stabbed Kandamaran in the back—”
“Now that I shall never believe! No matter what harebrained scheme he
may think up, Vandhiyathevan would never be cowardly enough to stab a
man in the back, and he's certainly not the kind of bastard who would do
that to his own friend —!”
“Even if he found out that his precious friend was now involved in a
treacherous plot to betray his own lord and master? And if said ‘friend’ was
eager to co-opt Vandhiyathevan's own services and loyalty in such an
effort?”
“Whatever the temptation or cause, he would engage his foe in a fair fight,
face-to-face—as to stabbing him in the back … no, I shall never lend any
credence to that.”
“Your confidence in your friend is a source of eternal marvel to me, thambi.
Be that as it may—that is the accusation placed upon him by the
Pazhuvettarayars, who are now hunting him down in good earnest. That is
all I know—but I wish to tell you this: regardless of whether or not any
stabbing took place, it seems obvious to me that there must have been some
sort of altercation between Vandhiyathevan and Kandamaran. That serves
as proof, doesn't it, that your friend was blameless?”

“I assure you that there's no need to go quite that far, to establish his
innocence. Should Vandhiyathevan ever decide to join hands with our
enemies, this very earth, I believe, would collapse into anarchy. The seas
would dry up into barren, arid deserts; the heavens would crash down! The
sun would rise at night, and the entire Chozha clan would disintegrate into
nothing—” Aditha Karikalan could barely speak for the haste and emotion
that coloured his voice and features.
“I must say, I agree with His Highness,” Parthibendran put in heavily, at this
point. “Vandhiyathevan meditating evil upon us and the empire—that I
could never believe. If there's any accusation that I must place upon him it's
this: not for all the worlds can he resist the temptations of a beautiful young
woman. He'd lose his head in an instant.”
Aditha Karikalan threw a glance at his companion; his lips curved into a
slight smile. “Pray, why else do you think I charged him with an olai to be
delivered to my sister, Ilaiya Piratti, immediately after he'd done so to the
Chakravarthy? Once he'd set eyes on the princess—ah, where would he find
the means to escape? She'd have a faithful servant at her feet for life.”
“Were those your instructions to that boy?” queried Miladudaiyar at once.
“Ah, what a pity that I knew nothing of this—and have you heard anything
from Vandhiyathevan, once he fled Thanjavur? What of news from Ilaiya
Piratti?”
“I expect an olai any moment—but so far, I'm sorry to say, nothing.”
“Once Arulmozhi is here, you shall send for your sister as well, and then,
all will be well. We may entrust this empire, with all its concerns, problems
and ruses to Ilaiya Piratti, whose advice we shall all take to heart and follow
with right good will. That should be the end of all our worries—”
“Good heavens, Thatha—you seem to be even worse than Vandhiyathevan,
in this respect! “
“Indeed, and I am not ashamed to admit it. She took the scepter of this
empire into her capable hands when she was barely two, my boy; her word
was law to her parents, me and your grandmother; she has tyrannized us
every way she wished—and that is how it has been, to this day; that is how
I hope it to be. Her slightest wish has always been my command, as far as I
am concerned. Do not consider her praises a slight against you, Karikala,

for they add to your consequence, if anything, and not otherwise. For there
is none, neither among men or women in this land, whose intelligence rivals
that of Ilaiya Piratti Kundhavai!” exulted Miladudaiyar, voice fairly ringing
with elation. “You know of the superior intellect of our Chief Minister
Anirudha Brahmaraayar himself, don't you? And if such a great man
unbends enough to ask her opinion—well, what more can I say?”
“All very well, I daresay and I'm not denying any of it, but what's to say
that Vandhiyathevan would have met Ilaiya Piratti first?” Parthibendran's
dislike of the young man, never very far from his thoughts, now rose again
in good earnest. “What if he'd run headlong and bumped into some other
young lady before her, and fallen hard for her considerable charms? Such as
that dazzling beauty, the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani, for instance?”
The last few words, uttered in a low voice, escaped the old man's notice; not
so Aditha Karikalan, whose head snapped up in an instant. The Crown
Prince turned and leveled a stare at the Pallava warrior that fairly flew with
such sparks of fury that Parthibendran almost quailed.
“You youngsters,” Malayaman judged it time to leave, and rose from his
rocky seat. “Doubtless have a great many things to discuss, in privacy. You
are leaving for Ilankai tomorrow, are you not? Well, then. As old as I am, I
shall need all the time I have to return to my palace. You may converse
freely, and come home as you choose.”
He left, and the friends waited, watching as he moved away, slowly.
Then, Parthibendran turned to Aditha Karikalan. “Your Highness—my
prince! Something troubles you deeply, chipping away at your conscience; a
sorrow that has lodged itself into your heart, allowing you no respite. I
know for a fact that it has to do, somehow, with the young queen of
Pazhuvoor … your very face and form undergo such a complete
transformation whenever either she, or Periya Pazhuvettarayar's marriage
are mentioned; you eyes turn bloodshot and fairly spew fury. How much
longer will you stifle this anguish—before it consumes you completely?”
He approached close, eyes brimming with a sort of suppressed anticipation.
“You've called me your closest friend a thousand times—and yet, you seek
to shut me out of your deepest thoughts. Why? Why not admit me into your
confidence, share what ails you so deeply? Will you not permit to listen to
you, and assuage your pain? How many more days must I wait by your side

in silence, fated to watch you suffer endlessly, without the power to serve
you?”
“My friend,” Aditha Karikalan heaved a deep sigh. “My pain, as you say,
has resided within me for years—but it is one that can never be assuaged. It
lives within me, and must die only when I do—there's no way to end it,
else. There's no reason for why I mustn't share it with you, and so I shall—
but later, tonight.” He rose. “Now, we must leave for the palace with the old
man—it isn't fair to let him return, all alone.”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 54

“Deadlier than venom, is she!”
The three warriors spent the night in one of the old edifices that had once
belonged to the Pallava Emperors of yore. Once the last meal for the night
was at an end, Malayaman left, eager to attend a performance of an Aravan
Tale recital, to be held by the Aindhu Radhams, the Five Chariots. Aditha
Karikalan and Parthibendran retired to one of the balconies, upstairs.
Underneath, spread out the night-time vista of Maamallapuram. Aditha
Karikalan stood watching it for a while, from his superior vantage position.
Lamps flickered feebly, here and there, in a vain attempt to dispel darkness;
the streets were mostly deserted. The last ceremony for the day, the ardha
jaama poojai was done; massive temple doors slowly groaned shut. The sea
roared dully, the desolation and loneliness seeping in from afar. In the
distance, by the Five Chariots, people surrounded the villuppattu artist as he
sang and recited the tale of valorous Aravan; dark, misshapen shadows
beyond a ring of oil-torches.
“Old as the hills—and he's gone to listen to ancient tales and songs!”
exclaimed Aditha Karikalan. “Men like him are hard to find these days,
aren't they? Getting on in years, but for sheer determination and iron grit,
there aren't many like the ancient ones.”
“Good lord, Your Highness, not you too. Pray don't start on the glory of the
past,” groaned Parthibendran. “What did they accomplish after all, that we
haven't, ourselves? And if it comes to that—I certainly haven't heard of any
warrior who went into battle and performed the illustrious deeds you
yourself did.”
“It augurs well for you, Parthiba, that I know you to be honest; your lips do
not speak the direct opposite of what your heart harbours. Else—I would
have been forced to consider you my greatest enemy,” Aditha Karikalan

smiled. “Your extraordinary praises; the way you pander to my ego —!
There's nothing more powerful when it comes to destroying a man, my
friend. Nothing else that would assure his swift and inglorious descent into
Pathalam, the goriest underworld!”
“Indeed, Ayya, if one were to praise and please a man with completely
spurious motives; to raise him to the skies without just cause—ah, that, then
would be false and pretentious. If you were to approach Madhuranthakan,
that shameless Pazhuvettarayar slave, for instance, and tell him that he was
a ‘Warrior Among Warriors,’ that would be mukasthuthi. And if you ever
believed me to be guilty of such a crime, pray do not hesitate to cut me
down with your own sword. Tell me—was any of what I said about you,
ever an exaggeration? A blatant untruth? Who among those ancients, after
all, has even come close to accomplishing your deeds? One could, perhaps,
consider your great-grandfather, Rajadithyar, who embraced death on is
elephant, as somewhat approaching you with respect to valour; even so, he
couldn't have been greater …”
“Enough, Parthiba, for god's sake! Compare Rajadithyar and me—how
could you even—you and I, my friend, aren't worthy to speak of a man who
destroyed the massive Rashtrakuda hordes, the scourge of millions, a
terrible ocean spewing evil in its wake, with a miniscule army! And
ascended to the heaven of warriors too, on the battlefield. Compare
ourselves with him? Do we even dare? Ignore the Chozhas for a moment, if
you will, and let's speak of your own ancestors, the Pallavas. Think of the
legends they possessed—are we ever to see the likes of Mahendra Varmar
and Maamallar again? To think of Narasimha Varmar, who single-handedly
crushed Pulikesi, a man who ruled an Empire from Narmadha in the north
to Thungabhadhra in the south—and even erected a column of victory in
Vathapi? And to speak of us, in the same breath as him! Do you think
anyone in our lifetime, or after us, could ever to bring into existence a
fantasyland such as Maamallapuram? Adada, just look around you once,
Parthiba. Cast a glance at the villuppattu recital over there, in the distance.
Men who could turn ordinary boulders into such beautiful works of art;
carve rocks into magnificent chariots—who could accomplish such great
feats—imagine, if you will, what a joyous place Maamallapuram must have
been, three hundred and fifty years ago. How alive! My skin prickles with
goosebumps at the very thought of it. Don't you feel it too? Doesn't your

heart soar, your shoulders swell with pride at the mere thought of your
ancestors?”
“Some moments ago, you accused me of mukasthuthi, Your Highness. It's
slipped your mind, perhaps, that I've always leavened my praises with a
healthy dose of criticism as well. It appears that this terrible passion for arts,
crafts and sculpture that destroys people and their whole lives, has infected
you too. My ancestors were afflicted by it, and thus, all their victories and
triumphs lost merit. Maamallar did erect a jayasthambam at Vathapi as a
sign of his momentous victory; true. What of him, later? What did the great
warrior do? Sit around sculpting rocks and making holes in the boulders
strewn around him, of course! And we all know what happened as a result:
the Chalukyas gained in strength, built an Empire, gathered their massive
forces and swept down south for revenge. Kanchi and Uraiyur were reduced
to ashes; they descended even as far as Madurai. Had Nedumara Pandiyan
not decided to make a stand and destroy them in Nelveli, all of the southern
lands would be under Chalukya suzerainty by now, wouldn't they?”
“Not at all, Parthiba. Remember history, my friend—have we ever heard of
any one dynasty ruling endlessly, beyond all bounds of time? Never! Even
the illustrious Ishvaku clan, which boasted Lord Rama, died out. The Rettai
Mandalathar rose to bring the Chalukya reign to an end. Empires and
dynasties do have a habit of rising to tremendous greatness, and crashing to
hollow depths; entirely natural, don't you think? There are kingdoms that
have ruled for centuries, and disappeared without a trace. Take my own
forebears, for instance: my ancestors, such as Karikal Valavan and Killi
Valavan ruled illustriously—but what do we know of them today, after all?
Only their names and a little of what they accomplished; largely because a
few poets managed to sing verses upon them. As for those verses
themselves—who knows if they were the complete, undiluted truth—or just
outrageous lies spewed for the edification of the public, after a few
enjoyable rounds of liquor? But the fabulous sculptures craved by
Mahendra Pallavar and Maamallar—now these will stand the test of time,
for thousands of years, extolling their praises to the whole world. What
have you and I done to even remotely be compared to them, I ask? To be
sure, we've slaughtered tens of thousands of men; made sure battlefields
were submerged under rivers of blood. But what else? What else, to ensure
that our names stay on in history?”

Parthibendran sat still for a while, dumbstruck. Was this really Aditha
Karikalan, speaking? Then, he heaved a sigh. “If these are truly your
opinions, Your Highness, about wars and heroes—then, well—what can I
say? You're distressed today; your mind is not at peace. Perhaps that's the
reason for this disillusionment. Couldn't you possibly open your heart to
me, Ayya?” He pressed on, eagerly. “Couldn't you possibly let me know the
secret that's locked in your iron-heart?”
“And if I did, Parthiba—if I really did break open my heart to you … what,
or who do you think you'll find, in it?”
“That's what I wish to find out, Swami.”
“Not my parents, Parthiba. Not my beloved brother and sister, dearer to me
than my own life. Not even you and Vandhiyathevan, best of my friends.
No—you'll find a woman. The very embodiment of evil. That wretched,
accursed Ilaiya Rani of Pazhuvoor—that's whom you shall find. Ah, the
trials and tribulations she's put me through! The torment I've been meted
out by Nandhini, cruel, cruel Nandhini, more venomous than poison!”
Aditha Karikalan's voice reverberated with barely controlled fury; each
word burning like hot coals. “She's the one within my heart, breaking it
every living moment—and I've never breathed a word of what I've
undergone, all this time, to a living soul. No one, except you.”
“I rather guessed this, Your Highness. Whenever the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani
was mentioned, I noticed your face darken; your eyes turn bloodshot, and as
for the agony I glimpsed in them … well. But do tell me—how did such a
fatal attraction ever find place in your heart? You, scion of a dynasty that
reveres every woman as his own mother? Pazhuvettarayar too, has close
ties with your family and has done so, for generations; he's getting on in
years as well. They might be our foes today—but surely that wasn't the
case, before? Your father and grandfather held him in the highest regard, I
know. And to even think of the woman he married, with the Lord Agni as
his witness—no matter how abandoned she is … is that really the right
thing to do?”
“It isn't, Parthiba, it isn't! Do you really think I don't know so? I suffer,
because I do. You see—she didn't make a place for herself in my heart after
her marriage to Pazhuvettarayar, but before. My heart was poisoned by her
bewitching ways aeons ago. I tried—believe, me I tried to weed out her

memories—but I couldn't. I know I speak as though she's the one to blame
—but the truth is … well, no one knows the truth except God. If anything,
He's the one to be blamed for every ill. Or, perhaps, fate itself, that made us
meet, and then part in such cruel fashion!”
“Met her before she became the Young Queen of Pazhuvoor, Your
Highness? But—how? When, and where?”
“That's a very long story. Are you sure you want to listen to it today?”
“Indeed I do. In fact, I shan't find peace until I do know the truth of it.
You've asked me to leave for Ilankai tomorrow, haven't you? I'm not sure I
can carry out my orders right, without listening to your story, and finding
some way to soothe your heart!”
“Soothe my heart, is it? My friend—I'm not sure peace is for me, in this
lifetime, at any rate. I'm not sure if I shall find it even in my next birth. But
you wish for it; I shall oblige you. I don't want you to leave for Ilankai,
knowing that I harbour a secret that I cannot even trust you with!”
Karikalan paused, for a while. Then, he heaved a great sigh, and began his
tale.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 55

Nandhini's Lover
“I was twelve, when I saw Nandhini for the first time. Once, I, my young
sister and my brother were paddling boats in the little pond behind our royal
palace, in Pazhaiyarai. We finished our play, tied up our boats, and returned
to the palace through the gardens. Somewhere along the way, the voice of
our grand-old-mother Chembian Maadevi's voice floated out to us. We
made much of our grandmother, all of us; we'd grown up in her fond
embrace, after all. We ran up to the little arbour she was seated in, to tell her
about our play. There were three other people in there, aside from her. One
of them was a young girl, around our own age. The other two were
obviously her parents. They were speaking to Maadevadigal about their
daughter. They stopped, and everyone stared at us, as we erupted into the
little space. But I—the only thing I saw was the young girl's large eyes,
widening even more, at the sight of us. I can picture the scene even now, so
clearly, in my mind's eye …”
Aditha Karikalan's voice trailed away. He raised his eyes to the sky, and fell
silent. Perhaps he glimpsed that young girl's face from long ago, once again,
amidst those wispy clouds, floating serenely in the night sky.
“Ayya?” came Parthibendran's voice. “Please go on.”
Aditha Karikalan returned to earth, and continued his tale. “It was my sister
Kundhavai who tumbled out the whole story about our boats and play.
Maadevadigal listened patiently to her, and then pointed out the young girl.
“Do you see her, my heart? How bright she looks! She and her people have
arrived here, from the Pandiya country. They will be staying here awhile, at
the home of Eesana Siva Battar. The young lady's name is Nandhini.
Include her in your play sometimes, won't you? I am sure she will make you
an excellent playmate.”

“I realized, almost at once, that my sister was revolted at the very idea.
Anna, did you take a look at the girl we met just now? How ugly she looked,
to be sure! she muttered, as we made our way outside the arbour. ‘Why do
you think her face looked so terrible—just like a hideous owl? Why does
Patti wish us to play with her? Good heavens, how can I even look at her
without laughing? What do I do?’ she asked.”
“I understood something very important, in that instant: women are born
with jealousy in their hearts. No matter how beautiful she is, she can't stand
to see another as pretty. My sister's beauty was famed, amongst all those of
our clan—but not even she could bear another girl's loveliness. What else
could be the reason behind all her catty remarks? But then, I wouldn't let
her alone either; I exaggerated the other girl's charms just to infuriate my
young sister. We argued and quarreled about her, often; our young brother
Arulmozhi would stare at us, puzzled, unaware of the reason for our
animosity. Some time later my father left for the Pandiya War; I
accompanied him. Together, we battled and triumphed many times, over the
Pandiyas, as well as the Ilankai forces sent to assist them. And then, finally,
Veera Pandian ran away from the battlefield and concealed himself. At that
point, we weren't quite sure if that was what he'd done, or if he'd fallen on
the battlefield. That was the signal for the Ilankai soldiers to fall into retreat.
We pursued them, right up to Sethukkarai. Those who had managed to
escape death at our hands, hastened into ships, and left our shores hotfoot.
My father wished to teach a lesson to the Ilankai king, who kept sending
troops to assist the Pandiyas, and caused us endless trouble; he decided to
send a large force there, under Kodumbaloor Siriya Velaar. It took some
time for us gather the ships and material required for such a large
undertaking—but still, we stayed there for awhile, loaded our ships with our
men, and sent them on their way. We returned to Chozha Nadu only after
having learnt that our men had disembarked in Mathottam, safe and sound.”
“Two years had passed, by the time I came back to Pazhaiyarai. I'd
forgotten everything about the poor little priest's daughter, who'd come to us
from Madurai or thereabouts. But when I returned to the palace and saw her
and my sister—they'd changed beyond all recognition. They were very
friendly, these days, I noticed. Not only had Nandhini grown—she fairly
dazzled, dressed in silks and ornaments. This, I learnt, had been my sister's
doing. Nandhini, however, refused to meet my eyes or speak to me, as in

the old days. I tried very hard, I admit, to remove these hindrances; my
greatest delight lay in her company, when I could bring her to overcome her
bashfulness. I can't really explain why I felt this way—I certainly couldn't
understand my exhilaration, when I was young. During those days, my
heart was overflowing with a sort of ecstasy, like the new floods that break
the banks of Kaveri. I realized something else too: those around me didn't
quite like any of this. Kundhavai began to detest Nandhini, ever since my
return; my grandmother, Maadevadigal called me aside as well, one day:
“She's a priest's daughter; you, however, are the son of the Emperor. You
have both come of age. It is no longer advisable for you to be friends.” I,
who had revered her as deity until then, and placed great faith upon her
judgment, now grew quite angry; I refused to heed her words. I went
against her express command, searched out Nandhini, and took great
delight in pursuing her friendship. Not that any of this lasted for long. I
learnt, one day, that Nandhini and her parents had suddenly left for their
village in Pandiya Nadu. Sorrow crushed me—and fury, as well. I locked
away my misery, but made my sister the target of my anger. Thanks to god,
though, it came about that I had to leave for the North, soon enough; I left,
along with the Chozha armies that marched against the Rashtrakuda forces
that had invaded Thirumunaippaadi and Thondai Mandalam. That was
when you and I met, and became inseparable friends.
“We battled the Rashtrakudas, with the help of noble Malayaman; set them
running north, beyond the River Paalaaru, and captured Kanchi. Bad news
arrived, right at that moment, from Ilankai: our forces had been routed out,
and Kodumbaloor Siriya Velaar had lost his life. The moment he heard the
news, Veera Pandiyan, who had slunk away and curled up, inside a desert
cave, crept out, snake that he was. He gathered his forces again, invaded
Madurai, and raised the Fish Flag atop the fort. You do remember our fury
when news came to us, don't you? Our anger, the way we wanted to crush
this little up-start like an insect? We left at once, for Pazhaiyarai. My father
was already ailing; his legs had begun to lose feeling. All this
notwithstanding, he was still prepared to set off for the battlefield. I barred
his way, and flatly refused to entertain the idea; I swore a bloody oath in his
presence: I would not return to Chozha Nadu without routing the Pandiya
army, re-capturing Madurai, and lopping off that traitorous Veera
Pandiyan's head as a prized trophy. You were there too, at that time. My
father honoured my pledge and sent us both to battle, subject to the

condition that we would accept the leadership of Kodumbaloor Boodhi
Vikrama Kesari, who had already marched thither, with his forces. We
agreed; on our way, we ran into Periya Pazhuvettarayar, who revealed his
disgust at having been passed over to lead the attack, not to mention the
indignity of Kodumbaloor's King being delegated that responsibility.
Adding insult to injury, indeed.
“Our war fervour convinced Senathipathi Boodhi Vikrama Kesari to grant
us permission to lead the war, our own way. It wouldn't be too much to
boast, my friend, that you and I managed to accomplish quite a few
extraordinary feats of bravery, in that battle. We destroyed the Pandiyan
army and annexed Madurai again—but that wasn't all. We weren't satisfied
with sending those devils packing; we wished to raze them down to their
very roots. We commanded our soldiers to hunt down and kill every those
cowards scattering in all four directions from the battle; one by one,
mercilessly. We, on the other had, gathered an elite band of warriors, and
set out to pursue the Pandiya King. It wasn't too difficult either; the Fish
flag, fluttering aloft, showed us his direction; we followed, hotfoot. Our
enemy was surrounded by his precious bodyguards, those wretched
Abathudhavis, who guarded his person like a fortress. It must be admitted
they were a shade more terrifying than even the famed Chozha Velakkara
army; they had sworn a blood oath, after all, to never desert their king in
distress, and to save his person with their own lives, if necessary. And if
they couldn't, and the Pandiya king suffered grievous physical harm as
result, then they would cut off their own heads, in atonement. Those were
the warriors we were ranged against. They carried out their duty well, I
must say; we killed them all, to the last one. The corpses of those who'd lost
their lives at our hands grew and grew, like a mountain—but not even
amidst them could we catch a glimpse of Veera Pandiya. We'd been tricked
by the Fish flag—for it was an elephant that bore it, standing by. Not a sign
of Veera Pandiyan either, on, or anywhere in its vicinity! Well. He was an
adept at running away from battlefields and concealing himself in dark,
corners, wasn't he? We suspected that he'd probably done so this time as
well; split our army into several factions, and sent them in all four
directions, to find him.
“You and your forces thundered along the twin banks of the River Vaigai, in
pursuit. I wasn't sitting idle either: I descended into the riverbed, struck

across the sands, and went south. I could glimpse the hoof-prints of a
solitary horse, here and there. There were spots of blood, alongside the
horse's trail, as well. I followed both, and by and by, came upon a small
oasis of vegetation, in the middle of the Vaigai riverbed. Within, was a tiny
shrine, dedicated to Thirumaal. One or two huts, belonging to the temple's
priests, were beside it. The little oasis fairly bloomed with flowering trees,
meant for the exclusive use of the deity. There was a little lotus pond as
well, brimming with fragrant blooms. Perhaps you might remember, my
friend, that I had declared that particular oasis off-limits to our soldiers, at
all costs. Not just because I didn't want the deity's daily worship halted by
the exigencies of war—but also because of the presence of someone, in the
temple priest's simple home. The lady who had bewitched my soul; the
queen of my heart.
“You see—I'd caught sight of Nandhini once, when I'd entered the oasis.
She presented a different appearance, now: she'd bound her hair into a large
crown-like knot, brought it slightly in front, and decorated it with a string of
flowers, rather like Saint Andal. A garland of flowers hung around her neck
as well. “What's all this in aid of?” I asked her. She'd sworn, she said, never
to marry another human being, after our separation; that Kannan, the deity
would be her husband, just as he was for Andal herself. This, I thought, was
decidedly ridiculous. How on earth was a human girl going to marry a
deity? Even so, this was not, I felt, the right time to descend into an
argument with her. Once the war was done, I could enter in to all these and
more. I asked her if she needed any help. “Please ensure that your soldiers
do not enter this little oasis, by any chance. My old, blind parents are the
only ones here; my hale and hearty brother has gone on a pilgrimage to
Thirupathi.” I promised that I wouldn't let any of my men set foot on her
little island, and left. I made my way there twice or thrice, and did manage
to see her. Ah, what I felt for her—my infatuation was now ten times what
it used to be, a raging fire that consumed my heart! But I resolved to be
patient; there was work to be done, first: I must return to Pazhaiyarai, with
Veera Pandiyan's head on a stick. And in return, I could ask my father for
her hand in marriage.
“So far had I come, in my ruminations. Imagine my surprise and fury, then,
when I saw those horse-hooves leading straight into that little oasis! I went
further through the dense trees, and saw it tethered to one of them. The

runaway must certainly be here, in one of these very huts. I crept up to
Nandhini's dwelling, and peeped through a palagani. What I saw, then—ah,
my friend—it is branded into my very mind's eyes, like the burn of red-hot
iron onto my chest! Veera Pandiyan lay on a tattered, old rope-cot.
Nandhini was giving him little sips of water, to quench his thirst. Her face
glowed with unearthly beauty; tears trembled, like exquisite pearls, in her
eyes. I couldn't bear it any more. I kicked the door open with a bang.
Nandhini, who'd been tying up his wounds, stood up, and came forward.
She prostrated full-length at my feet, and rose. “I beg of you, Ayya, in the
name of the affection you once cherished, for me,” she pleaded, folding her
hands. “Do not harm him! He lies injured, here—let him not meet death at
your hands!”
“What?” I spluttered. “What's he to you? Why would you beg me to spare
his life?”
“He's my lover—my god,” she answered. “A vision of mercy, who has
promised to marry me!”
“I lost whatever shred of compassion I'd felt for an injured Veera Pandiyan,
lying on an old bed. Ah, this bastard—this sandaalan—what a revenge he'd
taken upon me! I wouldn't have cared if he'd stolen every last piece of my
kingdom—but he'd succeeded in spiriting away my beloved, the one who'd
taken my heart! How could I spare him? Mercy? Compassion? Never,
never!”
“I kicked Nandhini away, advanced upon Veera Pandiyan, on his bed, raised
my sword, and chopped off his head with one blow. Shame fills me even
now, when I think about that brutal, inhuman deed. But then—at that
moment—I was consumed, not just by the wrath of war, but a terrible,
personal vengeance as well. Fury took over; I used its terrible power to kill
Veera Pandiyan. When I stalked back to the doorway, I turned around, to
see Nandhini. She stared back, unblinking. I swear to you that I have never
before seen such a look, in my life. You've heard, haven't you, of the six
terrible emotions, the destructive forces, that rule our lives? Krodha, Lobha,
Moha, Madha, Maarchariyam? I saw them all, raging like an inferno in her
eyes, in that moment. Since then, I've tried so hard to divine the meaning of
that glance—but I've never understood it, to this day!”

“By then, you and others burst in, having searched for me. You saw Veera
Pandiyan's corpse, his blood-splattered head, and roared in victory. But I—I
was conscious of only one thing. The weight of all the Vindhya Mountains,
crushing my chest …”
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 56

The Anthappuram Incident
Centuries ago, Mahendra Pallavar, ruling a flourishing empire from Kanchi,
the capital, had made arrangements for the epic Mahabharatham to be
narrated in every corner of the country; in a land where peace and
compassion, advocated by Jain and Buddhist traditions, persevered, warfervour was an absolute necessity, he felt, to draw people out from their
stupor and ensure that their battle instincts were as well-honed as ever.
Bharatha mandapams, meant specially for the re-telling of these epics
sprung up at his command; the practice had continued almost uninterrupted
in Thondai Mandalam, all these years. Vast numbers of people gathered at
night, either in these mandapams or open-air clearings, to listen to their
favourite stories. Songsters, padinis appeared by the dozens, possessed of
the unique talent of taking the numerous stories and sub-stories from the
Mahabharatham, weaving them into appealing songs and verses, and
relating it to their audience in voices filled with vibrant emotion.
Archunan, wandering about on one of his pilgrimages, happened to catch
sight of Chithrangi, the Princess of Manipuri, in a garden a little outside the
borders of her kingdom. They fell in love; in due course, a most beloved
son, Aravaan, was born. The scion of a princess from a valiant clan among
the hills, and borne of Archunan himself, it was no surprise that Aravaan
turned out to be a phenomenal warrior. News of the imminent Kurukshetra
War reached him; he journeyed, forthwith, to join the Pandavas and offer
his services. It was the custom in those days to choose a young man, a great
warrior blessed with every gift known to humanity, and sacrifice him, to
ensure great victory. Talk, naturally, came up about this practice before war
was about to begin, and Aravaan spoke up: “Here I am—sacrifice me; that
you may be granted the victory you deserve.” The Pandavas possessed none
as valorous as he; they took him at his word, and duly gave him up as
kalabali, a human sacrifice.

The people of Thamizhagam lost their hearts to this brave young man,
Veera Aravaan, who had given himself up with such goodwill for the sake
of his own; shrines were built for him alongside the ones erected for
Draupadi Amman; festivals were held, and celebrated with great fervour, in
his honour.
Tonight's tale, beside Maamallapuram's Five Chariots, detailing his many
sterling qualities and valorous deeds seemed to have to come to an end.
“Long live Chakravarthy Sundara Chozha, Lord of the Three Worlds!”
Loud chants rose, cleaving the very air. “Long live the illustrious
Kopparakesari Aditha Karikalar!” This was the cue for the audience to
disperse.
“The story's over for tonight, I see,” murmured Aditha Karikalan.
“Malayaman will be back in a matter of moments.”
“Aravaan might be done—but what of you, and your tale, Your Highness?”
queried Parthibendran. “That's not over, not by a long shot, is it?”
“Malayaman's vigour never ceases to amaze me, you know,” said the
Crown Prince, meditatively. “At his age too—and he stays awake until
midnight, walking all the way to these clearings, listening to these stories.
Imagine the will-power of that man!”
“I see nothing in merely staying alive for years and years,” Parthibendran
shrugged. “This place is fairly littered with doddering old men who can't get
to sleep, and drag themselves to storytelling sessions to while away their
time …”
“And you're comparing Thirukkovilur Miladudaiyar with those drooping
men, who've done very little worth the while, in their lives? Ah, the number
of battles he's seen—dare we even suppose that we'll be alive, at his age?
And if, by some chance luck we were, I highly doubt if we'd be as able.”
“Well, if you must know, Your Highness, it's not exactly difficult to see why
those old-timers are striding around, fit and able, at their age—”
“It isn't? What's the reason, pray?”
“They never lost their hearts to petty little priest's daughters, for one thing;
neither did they sit around moaning about their lost love or weeping at her
very memory. And even if they had set their hearts on some woman—well,

their methods were swift and efficient: they simply dragged her by the hair,
flung her into their anthappuram, and that was it. Mission accomplished.”
“Nandhini is no ordinary priest's daughter, Parthiba. There's some mystery
surrounding her birth, I think—no, I'm sure …”
“Be that as it may, Your Highness—what does it matter? Who cares if she's
the daughter of a priest, a king or no one? What does her parentage matter?
Why, take that old fossil, Periya Pazhuvettarayar himself; he stumbles upon
her on some god-forsaken forest-path—and what does he do? Drag her to
his harem, of course, and throw her in, the ninth after eight women …”
“You know, I never could understand that, either …”
“You couldn't make sense of why an old man fell for her fatal charms and
let himself be reeled into her wily net?”
“No; —but why would a woman who professed her love for me—who then
fell in love with Veera Pandiyan and tried to save his life—finally submit to
this old man, body and soul? I confess I don't understand that.”
“I'm afraid I do; all too well. What confounds me, though, is something
else: having confronted that wretched Pandiyan, eternal foe of our Chozha
dynasty—a dastardly coward who runs and hides from his enemies at every
opportunity, and yet dares to call himself Veera Pandiyan—you came across
a woman who sheltered him, begged for his life … and then you leave her
alive? I never could make sense of that. You could, and must have done one
of two things: cut her into pieces that very instant, or, if you entertained
scruples about killing a woman, truss her up like a fowl and throw her into
our dungeons, at the very least. But you did neither … ah, I remember, now:
You dragged out Veera Pandiyan's corpse out of the hut and flung it outside;
we surrounded you, raving like maniacs, drunk with triumph. In the midst
of it all, I couldn't help hearing someone sobbing from within the hut.
“Who's that, weeping?” I asked; you replied that they were women, part of
the priest's family, frightened out of their wits by what they'd witnessed.
“Don't go in, any of you; there's no cause to terrify them any further,” you
commanded. Flushed with victory, none of us were inclined to do so,
anyway. We made our way back, carrying Veera Pandiyan's head aloft; you
accompanied us as well. But you didn't really participate in all the joy and
revelry of the moment; you seemed rather drawn and fatigued. I asked you

the reason; you brushed away my questions,” recalled Parthibendran. “I
remember wondering if you'd sustained some grievous injury that we knew
nothing about …”
“I had. Not physically, but in my heart of hearts; an injury that would never
heal. I couldn't—I couldn't forget the sight of her, falling to her knees,
shielding Veera Pandiyan, begging me to spare his life! Often and often
would I anguish over her desperate plea: Ayyo, why couldn't I have granted
her this wish? If my life could have brought her lover back, then willingly
would I have sacrificed it—but it wouldn't. Nothing I did, or could ever do,
would make her happy, and I cursed myself for it; I went mad, knowing that
I was the reason for her misery. We pride ourselves so much on our valour,
Parthiba; we believe ourselves equal to anything; able to carry out any task.
Nothing is beyond us, in this world! We look at ancient palm-leaves that
announce: “Kings possess the essence of the great Maha Vishnu Himself,
Guardian of the World; they are His representatives in human form”—and
we actually believe it! But do we have the power to return a departed soul
to its body? Has any member of any royal household ever been able to
achieve such a miracle? We have the power to cleave life from a body in
abundance, but no man has ever had the unique gift of bringing a corpse
back to life.”
“And a good thing too, I should say. Imagine the catastrophic results, had
you actually possessed such a unique gift! You'd have brought Veera
Pandiyan back to life; he'd have slunk away and buried himself in some
other mountain lair; the Pandiya War might still be going on, for all we
know. And all, for the sake of a woman's tears!” finished Parthibendran,
dramatically.
“You're a cynic, Parthiba; an unfortunate creature who can't appreciate
women. You speak so, because you've no idea about love, or its power.”
“Too right, Your Highness. I do cherish a wholesome hatred for women and
all their works; that's also why I've never gotten myself into the clutches of
some twisted woman's plot. Now, your beloved friend Vandhiyathevan, on
the other hand—hah! There's a hot-blooded idiot who needs no prodding at
all, to fall in love! All he needs is the barest glimpse of a turmeric-endowed
face, and he scrambles to do her bidding, a stupid leer on his face. That's
why you like him so much, isn't it?”

“Back to Vandhiyathevan, are we? I did wonder if you'd forgotten him,
during our conversation.”
“Ha, you never did appreciate my attempts to expose his true character.
Well, I won't. What happened next? Didn't you ever see Nandhini, ever
again? Or ask her why a woman, who'd pleaded and cajoled for Veera
Pandiyan's life, actually agreed to marry that old fossil, Pazhuvettarayar?”
“Veera Pandiyan was finally dead; once you'd celebrated more than half the
night away, everyone fell asleep, quite heavily. I couldn't. My eyes wouldn't
even close. Every nerve in my body quivered with the need to find
Nandhini again; to explain myself, and beg her pardon. But then the next
moment, I felt a fury that consumed my very being; all I was conscious of,
was to vent my terrible anger, as well. Whatever the reason, I had to see
her; I would know no peace, else. I couldn't return to Chozha Nadu until I
did. At midnight, I rose noiselessly, ensured that none of you saw me leave
the paasarai, and rode towards the oasis, between Vaigai's banks. My heart
thumped within my chest; my body quaked and shivered as though with a
fever, and my legs trembled, as I slipped off my horse. I crept, step by little
step, towards the little Thirumaal temple. Every single hut in its vicinity had
been torched and reduced to ashes. A man and woman, both old, squatted
beside one of them, in tears, lamenting their fate. I tiptoed closer—and
recognition dawned on me: they were the ones who had brought Nandhini
to the royal garden, in Pazhaiyarai. The moment they set eyes on me, their
grief and terror seemed to mount by leaps and bounds.
“They couldn't even speak, for the few first moments. I soothed and
pacified them, and then, they managed to gather their strength, and answer
my questions. Their first daughter lived, it seemed, across the river; she was
pregnant and about to deliver, and they had journeyed to see her. Nandhini
refused to go with them; knowing her willful ways and unaware of how to
make her do their bidding, they left her to devices, and went by themselves.
On their way home, they caught sight of a group of ruffians tying up a
helpless girl hand and foot, trying to throw her into a funeral pyre. Such
atrocities were not uncommon in times of war; terrified of even catching
their eye, they hurried on their way, and returned home—only to find their
huts burnt down. Nandhini was gone. The priest and his wife came to the
end of their recital. “Great Prince, where is our beloved daughter?” they
cried, wracked with sorrow and worry. “What has become of her?” I had

suspected for some time that they were not her real parents; now, I knew,
for certain. Not for a moment would they have entertained the thought of
leaving Nandhini all alone, had they truly borne her. Their distress didn't
move me; I couldn't find it in myself to feel sorry for them. Nandhini's fate,
though … oh, the very thought seemed to cleave my heart in two! Sorrow
had me in its fierce, unyielding grip. “Find your precious daughter's
wretched pyre, and throw yourselves onto it!” I screamed. “Burn and die,
you idiots!” I cursed them with all my grief-filled heart, and returned to
camp before dawn. You were all still deeply asleep; none of you had known
of either my departure, or return.”
“True; we didn't. And then, on top of all that, to keep such a thing to
yourself so long … the thought fairly turns my stomach. A fine way of
treating your friend, Your Highness; keeping secrets from him. Not in my
wildest dreams could I have suspected you of such—such treachery,”
Parthibendran scowled. “Why, in your place, I certainly wouldn't even have
entertained the notion!”
“But you aren't, are you, Parthiba? I don't think anyone could be, in the
whole, wide world. Who knows how you might have acted, in my place?”
“What's done is done, Your Highness; there's no sense in re-visiting the
past, or pointless argument. What happened, next? When did you next see
Nandhini? Was it after she'd become the Young Queen of Pazhuvoor, or
before?”
“Had I managed to catch sight of her before, she wouldn't have become the
Pazhuvoor Queen. We weren't even around, during the wedding; do you
remember our disgust, when we heard the news? My Yuvaraja coronation
occurred a few days later; my father, Grandmother and others of influence
didn't want any ambiguity about the succession—perhaps they suspected
that someone might instigate Madhuranthakan to ascend the throne himself?
Whatever the reason, I was made not only the heir, but also awarded the
Parakesari title; I could now authorize stone inscriptions in my own name.
“This vast Chozha Nadu is now yours and yours only, by right,” announced
my beloved father; his heartfelt words were echoed by his ministers,
courtiers, commanders and his subjects, with full force. Their resounding
chants of victory pierced the very skies. Nandhini had completely faded
away from my memory, during these times of joy and celebration—but

something happened soon after the Pattabishekam, that ensured that she
would never, ever leave my heart.
“The ceremony had just come to an end; an ancient Chozha crown now
adorned my brow. My father escorted me to the anthappuram, that I may
receive the blessings of my mother, and my grandmother, not to mention the
other royal ladies. Chief Minister Aniruddhar, my younger brother, and the
Pazhuvettarayar brothers accompanied us as well. My sister and her
handmaidens stood in a large group, mingling with the various royal
mothers; all of them dazzled in their best ornaments and finest dresses.
Their faces shone, their smiles brilliant, on this joyous occasion; clearly,
they'd been expecting our arrival eagerly. But my eyes were riveted onto
only one person—or rather, one face. Nandhini. My heart's dearest, whom
I'd thought burnt to embers, on a lonely pyre. But—how had she arrived
here, in the palace's anthappuram? How had she managed to deck herself
out in such fine garments and jewels, a queen among queens, eclipsing even
those bred in luxury and majesty? And the light in her eyes …! Her
exquisite features seemed enhanced a thousand times, from what I
remembered. Her beauty almost blinded me. My heart raced; within
moments, my besotted mind had built several improbable castles in the air:
Was this day, the day I'd been crowned Yuvaraja to the Chozha empire,
truly about to become the happiest, of my whole life? Was she who ruled
my heart and dreams, finally about to be my queen in real life as well, my
pattamagishi? Had the gods bent their compassionate gaze on me finally,
and wrought some sort of miracle—Indrajaalam, perhaps, or some fabulous
magic trick that made all my dreams come true?
“And then, my mother, Vaanamaadevi, took a couple of steps forward. “My
child,” she whispered, and embraced me warmly, bestowing her blessings.
That very instant, something shocking happened: I heard someone scream.
My father! Suddenly, he crumpled to the floor, unconscious. The place
erupted in pandemonium; the others and I threw ourselves into raising the
Emperor, and bringing him around. The royal women, except for my
mother and Chembian Maadevi, promptly disappeared to their own
quarters. My father recovered soon enough.
“I took my sister a little apart. How had Nandhini managed to arrive here, I
asked. “Why, she's married Periya Pazhuvettarayar,” revealed Kundhavai.
“She's the Pazhuvoor Ilaiya Rani, now.” I sustained a severe shock—as

though a sharp spear had plunged into my chest. Many are the injuries I've
borne, in battle, my friend—but nothing can ever equal the blow I received,
just then. Nandhini—the wife of Periya Pazhuvettarayar!”
Aditha Karikalan pressed a hand to his chest. Clearly, his heart ached. Even
now.
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 57

Maya Mohini
Karikalan's tale had not quite moved Parthiban to sympathy in the
beginning—but it must be acknowledged that now, as he wiped away eyes
moist with tears, he was touched, despite himself.
“I would've never dreamt that love for a woman could lead to such
devastating heartache,” he admitted. “None of us even guessed, of course,
that you'd sustained a shock such as this, the day of your Pattabishekam.
We were rather surprised at your low spirits, to be sure; we tried to raise
them by indulging in a lot of silly jokes and teasing, I remember.”
“You did. You also tried to restore my happiness by reciting the glory of all
my future achievements, once I ascended a glittering throne—you expanded
the Chozha empire from Imayam to Ilankai within the space of a day! Then
you crossed entire seas and invaded kingdoms far away … oh yes, I recall
all those conversations. I remember too, how distressed I was, at the very
mention of such topics.
“Later, one say, Nandhini asked me to visit, at the Pazhuvoor Palace. Must I
go, or should I refuse the invite? Conflict raged in my heart for a very long
time; in the end, I decided that I would honour her request. My mind was
besieged by a great many doubts and suspicions which I wanted clarified—I
also wanted to know, I must admit, the truth about her birth. I even
wondered if there was some connection between her presence in the
anthappuram that day, and my father's sudden, inexplicable loss of
consciousness. You may remember, perhaps, that though he came around
quite soon, my father was never quite himself again; his health too, wasn't
what it used to be.
“If I could but just talk to her once—I cherished hopes that I might learn
answers to the mysteries that tormented me. That, at least, was the

explanation I gave myself. As to why I really wanted to meet her—ah, what
else could be the reason but this, this insane, irresistible force that dragged
me into her presence, this strange power that exerted all its considerable
influence over me? Everything else was just a ploy; reasons I needed to
justify my desire to see her. I obeyed the dictates of my heart, and Nandhini.
Pazhuvettarayar wasn't in town; there were none in his palace with either
the power or authority to forbid me entrance; none who knew, in fact, of our
old friendship. Many concluded that the Prince, made newly heir to the
throne was merely paying a formal visit to the royal mothers of the
anthappuram, to seek their blessings.
“I met Nandhini in the latha mandapam, in her palace garden. Parthiba—
you've heard tales of many sea voyages from hardened travellers, haven't
you? Do you remember what they said, about sea currents? That there are
some spots in the ocean that churn and heave, under the power of those
massive currents—that ships, once caught in their vicious toils, often
splinter to pieces. That was my experience too, in Nandhini's presence—a
helpless ship tossed and tormented, sucked into a terrifying whirlpool. My
body, heart and soul splintered into a thousand shards; I was horrified by
the words that came out of my mouth. Ayyo, what am I blathering on about,
I thought, but I couldn't still my tongue, which seemed to have taken on a
life of its own, and uttered a farrago of nonsense. Nandhini began quite
formally, felicitating me upon my Pattabishekam.
“I see no reason for happiness, upon the occasion,” I replied.
“Really? Why not?” she asked.
“Well, what a question! How could I, considering your treachery?”
She pretended not to understand me. Our speech grew more impassioned: I
accused her of having betrayed my love, and allowing herself to encourage
Veera Pandiyan's lecherous advances; I even managed to wound her about
having married that fossil, Pazhuvettarayar.
“You began by destroying my love for you, Your Highness,” she retorted.
“Then, you killed the man who loved me, in front of my very eyes; it almost
seems like you will know no peace until you've hacked me to pieces, as
well. As you wish, then,” she pulled out a small dagger from the recesses of

the clothing, at her waist, and stretched it out to me. “What are you waiting
for?”
“Kill you?” I asked, harshly. “Aren't you the one torturing me slowly, to
death?”
“And then—and then, my lips uttered words that make me shrink with
shame, when I think about them. “It isn't too late even now, Nandhini. Say
the word—tell me that you'll leave this doddering old idiot, and I'll give up
my position, my claims to this throne, this instant! Let us leave this
kingdom at once, sail to lands far across the great seas and live our lives in
endless happiness!”
Nandhini listened to my impassioned ramblings—and laughed. A terrifying
laugh that chilled me right down to my marrow. My skin prickles even now,
at the very thought. “Journey across the seas, make our home in new lands
—and do what, exactly? Chop firewood? Or did you, perhaps, envision us
cultivating plantain trees for a living? That would be idyllic, wouldn't it?”
she sneered.
“You wouldn't like that, would you?” I jeered, in turn. “The priest's
daughter is now the Young Queen of Pazhuvoor, isn't she?”
“Oh, I've no intention of being satisfied with my present station in life,” she
murmured. “I've set my sights on something more; something quite
ambitious—nothing less than the jeweled throne of this empire. You see, I
wish to become the Chakravarthini. Tell me—are you able and willing to
accomplish my desire? Kill the Pazhuvettarayar brothers in one stroke,
throw Sundara Chozha into prison, ascend the throne—and make me yours.
Your Queen, your pattamagishi!”
“Ayyo, how could you even—what are you saying?” I stammered. “Such
cruel thoughts—”
“What about killing an injured Veera Pandiyan in front of my very eyes?”
she demanded. “That didn't seem cruel to you, I suppose?”
“My fury knew no bounds; sheer wrath bubbled through my veins, blinding
my eyes and heart. I knew not what I was saying, except that I let loose a
torrent of angry, vicious words that tore her characters to shreds. I was
about to leave—but she still had something to say.

“Should you change your mind some day, Your Highness, do return,” she
crooned. “When your mind and heart are perfectly willing to make me your
Chakravarthini—come back to me!”
“I left her, then, finally,” finished Aditha Karikalan. “And that was the last I
saw of her.”
“Good lord, Your Highness,” Parthibendran, who had listened to this
account with growing horror, astonishment and not a little loathing, heaved
a great sigh. “What a terrible woman! Do such vicious demons actually
exist in this world, in real life? A good thing that you never met her, later.”
“I didn't—but she never will leave me alone. Nandhini's face and form—her
every gesture haunts me every hour, every minute, Pallava—she flits
around my consciousness during the day; tortures me in my dreams, at
night. One moment, she approaches me with a lilting smile capable of
bewitching entire worlds, eager to embrace me with a kiss; at another, with
a gleaming dagger in her hand, intent on plunging it into my heart.
Sometimes, she weeps and sobs as though her heart would break; at others,
her screams shatter the world, as she raves and rants, her long tresses flying
loose, scratching her cheeks with her own nails until they're torn, dripping
blood. She laughs and shrieks like an insane creature—and then transforms
into a soothing, ministering angel, intent on whispering calm words of
understanding. My god, my god—the torment I suffer at the hands of that
terrible witch—how do I put my heartache into words? Do you remember
my grandfather's words from this afternoon? Many were the reasons he
outlined, for why I shouldn't visit Thanjai; but there's only one reason for
my loathing to enter that city, and wishing my father to join me here, in
Kanchi: Nandhini.”
“That's your paltry reason? You're quivering with fear, afraid to set foot in
the capital for the sake of a woman? What do you think she might do—
practice some sort of deception and poison you?”
“Not at all, Parthiba. Your lack of comprehension pains me. I don't fear
death at her hands—only the fact that she might induce me to do something
against my very instinct. If I met her again, she's quite capable of
commanding me: “Imprison your father—send your sister out of this very
country—kill that old idiot, and take the throne by force!” And I—Parthiba,
I'm afraid that if I heard those words one more time—I might want to obey

her. One or the other of us must die, my friend—that, or death must
embrace us both,” anguished Karikalan. “Else, I see no hope of peace in
this lifetime!”
“Really, Your Highness—what's all this? Why must you die? Just say the
word, and I shall postpone my journey to Ilankai. My first assignment will
be to kill that witch. And if I fall a victim to sthree hathi dhosham, the curse
of killing a woman—well, then, so be it.”
“Attempt anything of the sort, Parthiba, and I shall consider you my
greatest foe, from that very moment. If any killing's to be done, I shall do it
—with my own hands. I shall strangle Nandhini—and then kill myself as
well! Not for a moment will I ever allow anyone else to touch her, or harm
even the nail on her little finger. Forget her, my friend, and everything else
that I said. Obey our grandfather's instructions; leave for Ilankai, tomorrow,
and bring back my brother Arulmozhi, somehow. Let's persuade him to stay
here; grandfather and grandson can discuss the entire country's future
together, and come to their respective conclusions. Meanwhile, you and I
will journey to Ilankai; we shall set sail in magnificent ships on the eastern
seas, and gain massive victories against kingdoms such as Saavagam,
Pushpakam and Kadaaram. We shall plant the flag of victory upon those
lands and then, we shall sail westwards. There are glorious empires there,
aren't there—Arabia, Paraseekam and Misiram? We'll give them a taste of
Thamizh courage, shall we, and make sure the Tiger-flag flies high there, as
well? Did you know that karpu, the silly vow of chastity that binds women
here, has no place, in countries such as those?” Karikalan's voice was filled
with wonder. “Kings can cast their sight upon any woman that takes their
fancy, and bring them back to their anthappuram!”
Before Parthiban could think of and voice a suitable response to these
glorious fantasies, Thirukkovilur Malayaman appeared on the scene. “Ah,
there is nothing to equal Aravaan's wonderful tale anywhere in the world—
not even in all those fabulous strange lands you spoke of, just now. But—
why are you still awake, both of you, talking all hours of the night?” he
enquired. “You do remember your proposed journey to Ilankai tomorrow,
don't you, Parthibendra?”
“Precisely why we haven't been to sleep yet,” quipped the Pallava prince.
“We've been talking about it, all this time!”

BOOK 1 CONCLUDED.
OceanofPDF.com

