Ponniyin Selvan Part 3

The Killer Sword

Author:

Kalki

Rendered In English By:

Varalotti Rengasamy

Chapter 1: At Kodikkarai

The storm crossed the land near the Chozha coast and gathered momentum
thereafter leaving a trail of destruction in its course. From Kodikkarai to
Kaveripoompatinam the destructive dance of the storm was ominously glaring.
The branches of tall trees had been broken and tossed away. The roofs of houses
had been lifted, shattered and thrown far away. Only dilapidated mud walls
remained of what were once houses. Kodikkarai coast was flooded. People
thought that the sea had entered the land and an apocalypse was not far away. A
vast stretch of white sand between the land and the sea was the only proof
against that gloomy hypothesis.

The vast stretch of white sand was punctuated by quicksand. More water now
stagnated on the patches of quicksand. If anybody or even an animal stepped into
any of these patches they would be sucked in and buried alive. Patches of
quicksand were now large enough to swallow even elephants.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and his men reached the Kodikkarai coast two days after
the storm. A well decorated palanquin was now an integral part of the Senior’s
retinue. But this time the occupant of the palanquin was the Junior Queen
Nandini herself.

“There is no need to carry Madhuranthakan in secrecy. And you will have to take
me once in a while so that you can take Madhuranthakan in my palanquin
without making the eye-brows raise.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar accepted Nandini’s sane counsel. As an old man caught in the
grip of passion he naturally loved to take his young wife wherever he went.

They had reached Nagapattinam before the storm. As the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, the Pazhuvettaraiyar had some work in the coastal town.

At that time Nagapattinam was an important port in Tamilnadu. Ships came to
that port from far off countries. Many items were being imported through that
port. Goods were transported through thousands of small boats from the ship to
the port. An equal number of boats carried export merchandise to the large ships
anchored off the port. Many customs officials had been posted at the port to
collect the duties and taxes. As the Chancellor the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar had
the responsibility to oversee the customs officials.

After completing his work the Pazhuvettaraiyar paid a visit to the popular
Choodamani Buddhist Monastery at Nagapattinam. He was received with due
respect by the resident monks. He enquired about the well-being of the monks
and expressed his eagerness to help them should there be a need. The monks
thanked him for his kindness and told him that they were happy as they were and
nothing merited the intervention of the Chancellor. They also expressed their
gratitude to Emperor Sundara Chozhan.

Afew days ago some monks from the Choodamani Monastery had paid a visit to
the Emperor. They wished the Emperor a speedy recovery on behalf of all the
monks at their monastery.

At that time they had told the Emperor about the great service rendered by
Prince Arulmozhivarman to the cause of Buddhism. They were pleased with the
Prince’s orders to rebuild and renovate the Buddhist monasteries destroyed by
war.

“Your Highness, we also hear another happy development. A majority of the
monks want to gift the traditional throne of Srilanka to your son and make him
the King of our country. We hear they are deliberating among themselves about
this move. What more proof does Your Highness want for your son’s greatness?”

The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar heard these words and a strange idea formed in his
mind. He waited till the monks took leave of the Emperor.

“Oh The Mighty Emperor Of The Three Worlds! Your Majesty! Your authority
has spread in all the directions. Everybody living on this earth is under your
sway. But your dear sons have always remained outside the ambit of your power,
Your Majesty. There are enough people to spoil your sons, and these people are
at present occupying high positions in the State. Adithya Karikalan refuses to
come here to see you; instead he sends message asking you to come to Kanchi.

And the person who spoils him is none other than your father-in-law,
Thirukkovilur Malayaman. You requested your younger son to return from
Srilanka several times. I am tired of sending messengers to him. And our
General, the Senior Chieftain of Kodumbalur, sees to it that none of our
messages reach him. For otherwise, do you think your son will delay his return
to the Empire, even after knowing that it is your wish? And now I have a flash,
Your Majesty. If you are interested, I’ll share that with you.”

On receiving the Emperor’s assent the Chancellor continued further in an
enthusiastic tone.

“We’ll issue orders to capture Prince Arulmozhivarman, charging him of trying
to usurp the Lankan throne. Our General Bhoothi Vikramakesari cannot act
against the Emperor’s orders. Again, if we somehow succeed in communicating
this order to the Prince, he would surely come, Your Majesty.”

The Emperor smiled.

The Emperor’s loved his son Ponniyin Selvan and he badly wanted to see him.
He knew that his end was near. He wanted to share his ideas about the future of
the Chozha Empire with his second son whom he loved the most.

If Prince Arulmozhivarman knew that the Emperor’s wanted Madhuranthakan
should be the King after his time he would not only happily concede his claim
but also would convince his elder brother Adithya Karikalan.

With these thoughts in his mind the Emperor immediately accepted
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s strange suggestion. Accordingly orders were issued for the
arrest of Prince Arulmozhivarman. The Captain of the Ships was given strict
orders that the Prince should not in any way be harmed.

After the two ships left for Srilanka the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was worried. If
something happened to the Prince in the course of executing the arrest order then
it would be a matter of shame and dishonour for him. He did not want to take
any chances with his Royal prisoner. He decided to go to Nagapattinam himself,
receive the Prince and then bring him to Thanjavur under his own personal
responsibility.

Of course Pazhuvettaraiyar had some hidden agenda too in his visit to
Nagapattinam. He wanted to make sure that the Prince did not see Sembian
Madevi, the Queen Mother (Madhuranthakan’s mother) or Princess Kunthavai
before he saw the Emperor. The Prince held these two ladies in high esteem and
would not go against their wishes. And these two ladies hated Pazhuvettaraiyar.
They might say something against Pazhuvettaraiyar and poison the mind of the

Prince. And before things were ripe for action, meaning before the death of
Sundara Chozhan, something might go wrong and then the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s
succession plan would go awry.

There was another reason as well. Ever since the guard at the underground
treasury chambers was attacked, the Chancellor’s mind was disturbed. He lost
faith in all and started to doubt everyone.

Is it possible for somebody to hide in the treasury? Who could it be? Will it be
the Vaana Prince who escaped from the guards at the Thanjavur Fort? In that
case he would have known many, many secrets.

Or is it that Sorcerer who comes to meet the Junior Queen quite often? The
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar is never tired of accusing Nandini and her Sorcerer
friend. I should know the truth.

He was deeply troubled when he knew that it was Kunthavai who sent Vandhiya
Thevan to Srilanka with a message to Prince Arulmozhivarman. What kind of
message would that be? Would that snake have known about the plans he,
Sambuvarayar and a few others had for the Chozha Empire? And did that snake
want to share that intelligence with her brother?

Whatever it is, it is very important that I meet the Prince soon after he sets foot
on the shores of Chozha Empire. As the Emperor’s orders were to arrest
Vandhiya Thevan along with the Prince, I should first meet him and find out to
what extent he knows about the developments in the Empire.

Driven by these thoughts the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar decided to travel to

Nagapattinam and wait there for the arrival of Prince Arulmozhivarman. His
young wife Nandini had more reasons to visit Nagapattinam. She was anxious to
see Vandhiya Thevan again. She badly wanted to know about the message
Princess Kunthavai sent through him. She was also eager to know about the
success of Ravidasan’s mission. When her husband told her about the
Nagapattinam trip she expressed her desire to join him.

Should somebody be paid for eating sweets? The old man immediately agreed.
He started fantasising about the romantic journey with his wife in a boat. He
thought finally the time has come to quench the fire of lust that was raging in his
body and mind.

Nagapattinam was ravaged by the storm when Pazhuvettaraiyar and Nandini
were there. Nandini enjoyed the ferocious dance of Nature. She was thrilled to
see waves as tall as coconut trees near the shore.

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s plan of a romantic journey with his young wife in a luxury
boat was foiled.

Once the storm passed the town Pazhuvettaraiyar enquired the officials about the
damages to the ships and boats of the Empire. The people living in the coastal
area were forewarned of the disaster and hence the damages were kept to the
minimum.

But some fishermen described the ghastly sight they saw in the sea between the
Lankan and Kodikkarai coasts. Two ships were struggling in the storm; one of
them was burning before it sank. This information made Pazhuvettaraiyar pretty
anxious for the safety of the Prince.

‘Oh My God! Are those ships the ones I sent to fetch the Prince? And if
something happens to the Prince, it will be a great scandal. The people will
never forgive me. The people loved the Prince. They were ready to lay down
their lives for him. And if the Prince’s life is in danger, what can I tell the
people? How can I answer the Emperor?’

Pazhuvettaraiyar wanted to gather more information on the ships he had sent to
Lanka. Perhaps if he went to Kodikkarai he would know about the fate of those
ships. Somebody might have seen the sinking ship. Some survivors from the ship
might have reached the shore. Yes, I have to go to Kodikkarai right now, thought
the Chancellor.

When he broached the subject to Nandini she accepted it immediately.

“I’ve not seen Kodikkarai yet. I’ve heard it’s a beautiful place. This is an
opportunity I don’t want to miss.”

There were two ways to reach Kodikkarai from Nagapattinam. One was to go by
boat on the canal running adjacent to the sea. The other was by road. The Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar had come with a large retinue. And hence the land route was
chosen. Again, Nandini did not prefer the water-route. She was afraid that if they
were closeted in a boat during the long journey the old man might try playing
some love games with her. That was the last thing she wanted in the world.

There was another reason as well. If they took the road that ran adjacent to the
sea they might meet some sailors and fishermen coming from the sea who might
provide some useful information on the whereabouts of the ships.

They gathered very little information. Many people repeated the same words.
When the storm was at its peak they saw a burning ship.

As soon as they reached Kodikkarai, the caretaker of the light house, Thiyaga
Vidangar begged them to stay in his large house. There was no other place
suitable for them to stay in the vicinity, he added. But Nandini rejected the offer.
She wanted to have a tent erected near the light house for their stay.

As soon as the tents were erected they spotted a huge ship in the sea. It came as
close to the shore as possible and then halted.

Pazhuvettaraiyar was excited. Judging from the torn sails it was clear that the
ship should have been caught in the whirlwind. Who could be its passengers?
Perhaps, the Prince? The tiger flag was not visible. But there was nothing odd
about it; for when even the sails were torn, how could the flag survive the storm?

Pazhuvettaraiyar sent a boat to the ship to gather information. Two people got
into the boat. One of them was Parthibendra Pallavan.

Prince Arulmozhivarman who got off the Pallava prince’s ship to save Vandhiya
Thevan had not returned.

This made Parthibendran anxious about his safety. Once the storm died down he
directed the ship to look out for the Prince. One of the sailors who got off the
ship along with the Prince was found struggling for life. He described to a
bewildered Parthibendran how Prince Arulmozhivarman risked his life to save
Vandhiya Thevan. The sailor described the plight of their boat. Parthibendran’s
fears for the safety of the Prince multiplied. If by any chance Prince

Arulmozhivarman had survived the storm and had reached Kodikkarai... He
decided to go to Kodikkarai and make enquiries. He ordered the ship to be
anchored near Kodikkarai.

He and another man got into the boat and started going to the shore.

It was then he learnt that the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was camping at Kodikkarai
along with his young wife.

He remembered how Adithya Karikalan had described the Junior Queen of
Pazhuvur. He wanted to have a glimpse of the woman who made one of the great
warriors of the Empire lose his mind in love. How would that seductress look
like? The desire to see Nandini dominated his thoughts.

As soon as he alighted from the boat he was taken to Pazhuvettaraiyar’s tent.
Parthibendran saw the Senior standing at the entrance of the tent.
Pazhuvettaraiyar looked quite majestic. His features were sharp and his body
muscular. Only then did he realise that it would be a great mistake to call this
majestic warrior an old man. Pazhuvettaraiyar looked very strong, physically and
mentally, stronger than many of the young men he knew.

As he was lost in thoughts a woman came from inside. She appeared like a flash
of lightning that had just come out of the black clouds. She looked like a flower
glowing in vibrant colours. As she stood by the side of Pazhuvettaraiyar she
resembled a soft creeper attempting to climb the trunk of a mighty teak tree.

Parthibendran was in a dazed state. Nandini saw the Pallava Prince and then
spoke to her husband,

“Who is this brave warrior, my Lord? I don’t think I have met him earlier.”

Her words were like drops of wine splashed from a golden cup. Those few drops
were more than enough to induce a state of inebriation to the Pallava Prince.

Chapter 2: The Web Of Seduction

Old men who have married young, beautiful women always live in the hell of
doubt and suspicion. They have a natural disgust for strangers. And
Pazhuvettaraiyar had strong reasons for such disgust.

He hated Nandini coming in the presence of a stranger. At the same time he did
not have the heart to reproach his young wife. His ambivalent feelings towards
the intruder came out in his bland reply to his young wife.

“Queen, there may be millions in this world whom we may not know. It is
impossible to know everyone. And we don’t lose anything by not knowing
somebody.”

Parthibendran’s response was poetic.

“Revered Sir, there is no loss for the Queen, the wife of The Chancellor of The
Chozha Empire in not knowing me. The loss is entirely mine. And hence let me
introduce myself. Queen, people call me Parthibendra Pallavan.”

“Oh, I think I have heard your name.” – Nandini.

“Parthibendra, why did you leave out your honours and accomplishments while
introducing yourself? From when did you become so humble? Nandini, he’s not
some plain Parthibendran. He’s the one who beheaded Veerapandiyan, who had

won over the empires of Vengi and Kalinga.”

The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was extremely sarcastic.

Nandini’s face immediately turned dark – like the dark clouds before the onset of
a storm. There were flashes of lightning from her eyes and then everything was
calm once again. She had a loud laugh.

Pazhuvettaraiyar spat venom.

Nandini exclaimed“I don’t know how many people have the honorific title of
beheading Veerapandiyan. Is there any limit to the numbers? The dead Pandya
king – poor soul - had after all one head.”

“Lady, that only shows the Chancellor’s affection for me. The title belongs only
to one man and he is our Adithya Karikalan, the Crown Prince.”

”Why do you say that young man? Don’t you want to take your share of credit of
killing a dead snake?”

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s tone and his smile were sarcastic.

“No, Your Highness. Adithya Karikalan did not kill a dead snake. When he lifted
his sword he snake was very much alive. And a woman who was as beautiful as
a celestial nymph appeared before him and begged for the Pandiyan King’s life.

If I were at the scene, if I had lifted the sword, I would have listened to the angel
and would have thrown the sword away sparing the life of the Pandya King.”

While responding to Pazhuvettaraiyar, Parthibendran was seeing Nandini
through the corner of his eyes. Nandini knew that the conversation was
becoming dangerous. She spoke to her husband.

“Dear, what’s the point in discussing old stories now? Let’s ask this man the
reason for his sudden appearance in our tent.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar turned to the Pallava Prince:

“Thambi let’s not kindle the past. Tell me about your travel. When did you leave
Kanchi? Where did you go? And why did you land here at Kodikkarai?”

Parthibendran was still in a dazed stage. He had to struggle to gather himself. He
had to strain himself to remind himself of his mission.

“Please bear with me, Revered Sir. I have been talking of irrelevant things. I bear
important news for you. The news that could make the entire Chozha Empire
sink in grief. Prince Arulmozhivarman who came with me from Srilanka,
jumped into the sea when the storm was at its peak. We have been looking for
him since then. We could not trace him. I came here because there’s a half
chance that he might have landed here.”

“OH MY GOD”

Pazhuvettaraiyar screamed. And like a tall tree uprooted by a gale he fell flat on
the floor.

Parthibendran rushed to hold him. Nandini stood in between and brushed his
hand aside. She sat by the side of her husband and let his head rest on her lap.

“WATER! WATER! “Nandini hollered.

The maid came running with water. The caretaker of the light house and his
family came running in. A few soldiers also came in.

Nandini ordered them all to keep away. She sprinkled cool water on her
husband’s face. “Dear... dear... honey...”

She called him in her sweet voice. The old man opened his eyes. He had
regained his consciousness. He sat up.

“Nandini, I heard something. Is that true? What did this Pallavan say? Didn’t he
say that Ponniyin Selvan was drowned?

"Do you know Nandini, - when Ponniyin Selvan was a child I used to lift him
with these hands and carry him on my shoulders. And with these same hands I
signed his arrest warrant. Oh My God! What will the Chozha Empire think of
me?”

Pazhuvettaraiyar hit himself. Nandini had so far not seen the strong old man
breaking down and crying. In fact nobody had seen that spectacle till that day.

“Don’t panic, my Lord. He has not told the whole news. Let’s hear him first and
then decide what is to be done.”

“You are right. Parthibendra, come on, fast, tell me what happened. Didn’t you
say that the Ponniyin Selvan died in the storm? Is that true?

"Or is it the figment of your imagination, propelled by some evil motive?
Beware, don’t try playing games with a hungry lion.”

The old man had fire in his eyes.

“I am absolutely sorry, Your Highness. I never said that the Prince is dead. I
can’t believe that such a huge calamity would have fallen on us.

"I just said that he jumped into the sea when the storm was at its peak. By God’s
grace he might have been saved. And there’s every chance that he might have
reached this shore. And I came here only to look for him.”

“Did he jump into the sea when the storm was raging? Why? What for? Why did
he get into your ship? And what the hell were you doing when he jumped out of
your ship?”

The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was anxious.

Nandini intervened.

“My Lord, let him start from the beginning. Why did he go to Srilanka?”

“Yes, tell me everything. Tell me the truth. Don’t try to hide anything from me.
If you did, I won’t you let you go out. Beware.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar gritted his teeth.

“Your Highness, I have never spoken anything but the truth. Even if I want to lie
my tongue will not co-operate with me.

"We at Kanchi heard that you, Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar and a few others were
conspiring against the Chozha Empire.”

“That’s a lie! Blatant lie!”

“Let it be, Chancellor. That’s my wish as well. I told you what came to us at
Kanchi.

"On hearing the news Thirukkovilur Malayaman, the Emperor’s father-in-law
and Adithya Karikalan, the Crown Prince sent me to Srilanka to bring back
Prince Arulmozhivarman.”

Parthibendra Pallavan told the whole story about his Lankan visit.

Pazhuvettaraiyar screamed.

“Oh My God! A big disaster has befallen the Chozha Empire. It was this sinner
who ordered arrest of the Prince. It was I who sent ships to capture him.”

“You were not to be blamed, my Lord. Even if you had not issued those orders,
the Prince might have got into this man’s ship and would have sailed to Kanchi.
So don’t be hard on yourself, my Lord. Beyond all our acts and decisions there’s
something called destiny. That has played a cruel role now.”

Nandini suddenly lowered her voice and whispered something into her
husband’s ears.

His face blossomed on hearing her words.

“Yes, yes. You are right. Why didn’t it strike me?”

“Parthibendra, I am now going to your ship to inspect it. You will have to be
here till I come back. Don’t try to escape.

"I am going to issue orders to my soldiers to throw spears on you if you try to
run away. Don’t die with the dishonour of having a wound on your back. You
come from a clan of warriors.”

“Your Highness. I don’t have any intention of running way. And even if I did,
your soldiers can’t stop me. And I don’t have any idea of getting injured on my
back.”

Nandini spoke.

“My Lord, don’t worry about this man. I’ll take care of him. If he tries to escape,
this knife will pierce his chest. You go in peace, my Lord. Enquire the sailors
and find out the veracity of this man’s statements...”

Nandini pulled out a knife from her waist cloth.

“Why should you bother about these things, darling? You may take rest inside
the tent. Or go to Thiagavidangar’s house. Our soldiers will take care of this
man. Or else I’ll take this man with me to the ship.”

“I am not coming with you, Sir. If I come you’ll doubt my intentions. You’ll
think that I influenced my sailors to speak for me. No, I won’t move from this
place. You may go, Sir.”

“I too am going to stay here, my Lord, till you return from the ship. I’ll be

looking at you from here.”

Having spoken thus Nandini whispered into her husband’s ears.

“Who knows, my Lord, this man might have come here to snoop on us. And
again the news about the Prince should not be leaked out till you come back. So
let me stay here with him.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar nodded and then got into a boat. The boat started sailing
towards the ship.

Nandini was looking at her husband’s boat for some time. She knew intuitively
that Parthibendran was now ogling at her.

She suddenly turned towards the Prince expecting him to hang down his head in
shame. But would the bee which had found out a honey-laden flower turn to the
other side?

Nandini wielded the sharp knife again.

“Beware! Don’t try to escape from here.”

“Devi, there is no need for the knife. There’s no question of escaping. How can a
fish caught in a net escape from it. I am hopelessly caught in your net... “

“What the hell are you talking about? Do you mean to say that I am a fisherwoman? If only Pazhuvettaraiyar heard that... “

“I couldn’t care less, Devi. But I did not talk about the fish net. I was talking
about the net of seduction cast by your spear-like eyes.”

“That’s even worse! Even if you say that I am fisher-woman it’s in a way ok. But
now you say I am a courtesan who habitually seduces men.”

“I’m sorry, Devi. I never meant that. There is no need for you to cast the net
Devi. The spider does not weave his web to capture the flies. It builds its house.
The flies are caught in the web.”

“Do you mean to say that I am a spider? Do I look that bad?”

“Sorry, Devi. The metaphor is wrong. I should have used the metaphor of the
lamp and the insect. The lamp is lit not for the insects to fall on it and die. It’s lit
for light. The foolish insects think that it’s something edible, fall on the light and
die.”

“The lamp is put off even by a soft wind. One can just blow it off as well. That’s
the power of the lamp.”

“Yes, the lamp can be put off; but not the Full Moon. The Full Moon does not
rise for the ocean, Samudraraja. It rises according to some natural principles.

"And it spreads cool light all over the earth making everybody happy. But just
look at the foolish sea? Why should it turn turbulent on seeing the moon? Tell
me Devi, how the sea can reach the moon, however turbulent it may be?”

“I have heard about the Pallavas love for poetry and their fertile imagination.
Only now I am seeing it.”

“Whatever I’ve read and heard in Puranas, I did not believe till yesterday. But
from today onwards I’ve started to believe them.”

“I don’t know what you are talking about.”

“I’ve heard that somebody born as a woman would have the powers to hold the
earth and the sky under her feet. "The demons who churned the Ocean of Milk
were cheated by Mohini, a woman, just before they could taste the elixir of life. I
have also heard that the two demons, Sunda and Upasunda, killed each other
because of a woman.

"Viswamitra’s penance was spoilt by Menaka. Kovalan was seduced by
Madhavi. Dasaratha sent his dear son Rama to forest only to please a woman –
Kaikeyi. The Roman Empire was destroyed because of the beauty of the Queen
of Egypt, Cleopatra.”

“Enough. Enough. Why are you citing all these negative examples?”

“You don’t know? You really don’t know who I am alluding to?”

“If it’s me then there is no error greater than that.”

“There’s no error, Devi. Your power is no less than that of those women.”

“Your words are your worst enemy.”

“How, Devi?”

“I sent my husband to the ship only to know something from you.”

“I understood your heart, Devi. That’s why I refused to go with him.”

“Didn’t you say that a woman tried to save Veerapandiyan and Adithya
Karikalan ignored her and killed him?”

“Yes, I did.”

“Do you know the foolish girl who tried to save the Pandya King?”

“She’s the one who illuminates the palace of the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar as his
junior most queen.”

“If only I had those seductive powers which you described I would have saved
the life of the man I loved. Why was I not able to do that?”

“It’s true that the blood-thirsty Karikalan did not pay heed to you. But do you
know what kind of torture he is inflicting on himself because he did not grant
your wish? I know, Devi.”

“How do you know? Did he tell you?”

“He has been suffering for three years. I only knew that something is tormenting
him. Only ten days ago, before I left for Srilanka he opened up. Since I heard
that from him... “

“Since you heard what?”

“I have had this burning desire to see the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur... “

“Do you remember saying that if only you were in Karikalan’s place you would
have let Veerapandiyan go because I begged for his life?”

“Yes, I do.”

“Is that true?”

“It is, Devi. You can test me.”

“I have a doubt.”

“Whatever you say with your golden voice will be honey for my ears. My mind
shall reach heights of happiness.”

“I have a strong doubt that you are testing waters. You talk about the web of
seduction I weave and in that pretext you are casting a net for me. You want to
know my secrets.”

Parthibendran was shocked. It was true that he started the conversation with that
idea in mind.

But then he forgot it soon. He was now really caught in the web of seduction
woven by Nandini.

And now her sway over him was so strong that he was ashamed of his earlier
intention.

He hid his emotions and told her in a flat voice,

“If that be the case, if I had come only to snoop on you, may I be hit by a
lightning.”

“Oh God, NO! Please don’t talk like that.”

“Why, Devi?”

“Another guy came from the Crown Prince. What was his name?”

“You mean, Vandhiya Thevan?”

“Yes. The same guy. He wanted to spy on me. And judging from what you say it
looks like he has really been hit by a lightning.”

“Unfortunately, he was not hit by lightning, Devi. Only his ship was. And the
danger that fell on him extended to our Prince.”

“I pity the Princess at Pazhaiyaarai. The two men she loved most in this world
died at the same time! What a misfortune!”

“Who are the two, Devi?”

“The two persons you mentioned. You know that the Princess has a special love
for her little brother.”

“The whole world knows it, Devi. I am wondering about the other person.”

“The messenger sent by the Crown Prince.”

“You mean, Vandhiya Thevan?”

“Yes.”

“No way, Devi. The Princess who can make the whole Empire dance to her tunes
will never fall for that arrogant, vainglorious, big-mouthed idiot... “

“Yes, the Princess has fallen for him. That’s why she sent a message to the
Prince in Lanka through him.

"In order to save Vandhiya Thevan from Pazhuvettaraiyar’s punishment. And my
husband, poor soul, thinks that he alone is responsible for the Prince’s untimely
death. The reason for the Prince’s death is the Princess. If she had not sent the
messenger........ “

“That’s true. This calamity could have been avoided.”

“When my husband returns from the ship you should tell this to him. And if you
do so, I’ll be grateful to you.”

“Is this the only way to earn your gratitude, Devi? I am sure there should be
other ways.”

“There are a hundred ways in which you can earn the gratitude of an innocent
girl.”

“Be kind enough to tell at least one or two. Adithya Karikalan had a golden
opportunity. And he foolishly let it go. And since then he has lost his sleep and
has been suffering. I would never do that kind of a mistake.”

“Do you really mean it? Are you ready to do anything to please a woman?”

“It depends on the woman, Devi. I would not have done anything for the women
whom I saw till yesterday. "And if only somebody made a comment like that I
would have laughed at her. But today is different, Devi. You may test me, Devi.
"If I had a hundred lives I will give them all to carry out your orders. If I had a
thousand kingdoms with me I’ll sacrifice them all for you, Devi. If you
command me to lose this world as well as the next, I’ll readily do that. If you
order me to forgive my worst enemies I’ll do that without asking why. If you ask
me to behead my dearest friend, I’d do that and place his head at your feet.”

Parthibendran appeared possessed. He was shivering. His lips were quivering.
His voice was shaky.

His teeth bit each other. All the hair on his body stood erect. He was breathing
like a furnace.

Parthibendran’s sudden change was not surprising when viewed from the safe
distance of time and space.

But for him it was. If somebody had told him yesterday that he’d change like this
today, he would not have believed that. And if he thought of this moment of
change later in his life, he would be surprised at his own self.

But this had nothing to do with Parthibendran alone. This is the general fate of
the human race. The world’s greatest geniuses have spent whole lives
researching on the nature and the urges of the human body. But our knowledge
in this field is far from complete. How can we ever hope to understand the
human heart?

Sinners have suddenly reformed and have become the holiest of saints. They
dance in devotion and become fit enough to receive Lord’s love. And they end
up serving the humanity.

As if to balance this change-over saints slip into a life of sin and lust. The fall of
the saints had always been dramatic. They reach the bottom of the pit in no time.

Nandini heard Parthibendran’s emotional outburst.

“STOP IT! STOP IT I SAY! I will never require you to do such ghastly deeds. I

will ask you to do something that will give happiness to both of us.”

Chapter 3: An Owl’s Hoot

Nandini was looking at the sea. The boat carrying Pazhuvettaraiyar was
approaching Parthibendran’s ship. She heaved a sigh. And that caused a storm in
the heart of the Pallava Prince.

“Tell me, Devi. What should I do? My happiness is not separate from yours,
Devi. Whatever makes you happy will make me happy too.

Strange thoughts appeared in his mind. The beautiful lady standing before him
resembled a parrot caught in the hands of a cruel old man.

‘Why can’t I release this parrot from the clutches of that old cat? If she gives as
much as a small nod, I’ll take her as a prisoner in my ship and then set her free
in a distant land. Marrying someone young enough to be his granddaughter...
how could Pazhuvettaraiyar do that...Heartless scoundrel.”

Nandini was still looking at the boat and the ship. She saw Pazhuvettaraiyar
getting into the ship from the boat.

“Thank God! He has safely got into the ship! He might be a warrior; but he is
still an old man. I was worried that he might trip while climbing up the ship.”

The Pallava Prince was disappointed. ‘Why should she love the old man so
deeply? What if the old dog fell down and drowned in the sea? That’s good for

the country. And good for her too! She’ll be free. Why is she bothered about
him?’

“I am surprised by the old man’s loyalty towards the Chozha clan. See how he
suffered when he heard that the Chozha Prince is in danger? Tell me this, Prince,
is there not a chance of the Chozha Prince being alive? We can’t say for sure that
he is dead, right?”

“Definitely not. But a person who jumped in to the sea in that kind of a storm
has a very slim chance of being alive. What can we do against the ways of
destiny, Devi?”

“No, destiny is the not the reason. It’s the greed of that Pazhaiyaarai demon. Do
you know, Prince, that Princess Kunthavai believes in astrology and palmistry
and that she had her brother’s palms and his horoscope checked by experts? And
based on the findings she believed that her brother was going to be crowned the
Emperor of the three worlds. Poor soul, when she hears about the fate of her
darling brother, her pain and suffering would be great. I want to be with her in
this hour of grief.”

Contrary to the emotional state indicated by this language Nandini’s voice was
quite enthusiastic. Parthibendran thought that there must be some problem in his
hearing.

“Why should you console her, Devi? All this happened because of her greed.
She has to pay the price for that.”

“Why should she, Prince? A drop of tear in her eyes will make a thousand hearts

bleed. She is after all the darling daughter of the most powerful emperor and the
most beautiful woman the world has ever seen.”

“I too was under that delusion, Devi, until I saw you in person.”

“And what do you think after seeing me?”

“Kunthavai’s beauty will not be equal to even the beauty of the little toe on your
beautiful feet, Devi.”

“I know you’ll talk like that in my presence. And tomorrow when you see her
you’ll even forget that somebody like me lives in this world.”

“Never, Devi! I want you to test my loyalty. Command me, Devi! Tell me what I
should do.”

“I don’t have the right to command you, Prince. I can request you. Many people
are spreading rumours that ever since I married the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar,
there has been anarchy and chaos in the Chozha Empire. I want to disprove that
rumour and I seek your help for that.”

Parthibendran was a tad disappointed. He thought she was going to give him a
difficult assignment. He was anxious to execute her command in order to please
her. But now she was talking about some political issues.

“Tell me, Devi. Tell me what I should do.”

“You should understand Prince that it was because of that greedy Princess
Kunthavai that the Empire is being threatened from within and without. The
Chieftains and the officials are simply put off by her arrogance. She wants the
Chozha throne for her younger brother Arulmozhivarman. That’s why she has
been thwarting all our attempts of peace-making. Now that the Prince is dead
and her mission defeated, the peace-making process will be smooth. Please listen
to me, Prince. You only told us a little while ago that the Ministers and the
Chieftains want to see Madhuranthakan on the throne after Sundara Chozhan.
The Emperor himself wants that to happen.”

“Is it so, Devi?”

“Yes, Prince. Otherwise why should the Emperor issue orders to arrest Prince
Arulmozhivarman? But I don’t approve of his action. I still feel that a consensus
will be a better option. Why don’t we give the area to the north of River Vellaru
to Karikalan and the remaining kingdom to Madhuranthakan? Your forefathers,
the great Pallava Emperors, were happy to rule over the small region in
Thondaimandalam. And the earlier kings of the Chozha Empire were contented
to rule the small region between the banks of Vellaru River.”

“But, Devi, why do you tell this to me? I am least bothered about which king
rules over which part of the empire.”

“But aren’t you loyal to your best friend, the Crown Prince, Adithya Karikalan?

“I have spent all my life fighting for somebody’s glory, working for somebody’s

well being, being loyal to somebody else. I am going to live for myself from
now on. Please listen to me, Devi. Many times I have thought in frustration, why
was I born in this world. And why I am alive. My ancestors, the Pallava
Emperors, ruled over a vast empire. They created a dream world like
Mamallapuram. At times I used to think that I have been born in this world to
uphold the glory of the Pallava dynasty. But soon I lost interest in that. I was
happy working for the Chozha Empire. And also quite happy with the friendship
of Adithya Karikalan. I thought I would spend the rest of my life in the same
way. My eyes were opened only today. Only a few minutes ago did I realise why
I was born in this earth. See there, Devi. Don’t you see the roaring waves of the
sea? They all support me and vociferously second the proposals in my mind.
And there in the yonder the birds of the forest echo the voice of my mind, Devi.
I beg of you, don’t talk to me about slicing up the Chozha Empire. Talk to me
about something else. Command me to bring priceless pearls from those coralislands that lie beyond all the seas. Order me to go deep into the sea to bring
priceless gems for you. Let me climb the peak of the Meru Mountains and bring
the Sanjeevani herbs for you.

Command me to fly in the high skies and fetch the stars for you. Order me to
weave those stars into a garland and adorn it on your neck. Let me bring the Full
Moon from the skies to be used as the mirror on your dressing table.”

“Enough, Prince, enough! The Pazhaiyaarai Princess thinks I’m crazy. Don’t
make her thoughts come true. Don’t make me really crazy.”

Parthibendran was ashamed.

“I am the one who’s crazy, Devi. But first tell me what do you want?”

"My name has been spoilt throughout the Chozha Empire... why, throughout

Tamilnadu. I want your help to clear my name. I hear people saying that the
Chozha Empire is going to ruins for the only reason that I married this old man.
They also say that it was I who changed the mind of Prince Madhuranthakan and
planted in him the desire to rule the country. They also say that it was I who
made the Chieftains support Prince Madhuranthakan. I don’t want to die with
this bad reputation.”

“Why should you talk about dying, Devi? Why are you so keen on torturing
me?”

“Oh, Pallava Prince, do you know palmistry? Do you believe in it?” Nandini
asked an irrelevant question.

Parthibendran did not respond to her. Instead he asked her to show her hand.

Nandini extended her right hand. Parthibendran was staring at it for some time.

“Amazing lines, Devi! These are quite rare. Please show me your other hand,
Devi.”

Nandini complied. Parthibendran was looking at it for some time.

“Tell me Devi, has anybody seen your hand earlier? Have they told you anything
about your future?”

“Yes. Once the Pazhaiyaarai Princess saw my hand and predicted my future.”

“What did she say?”

“She told me that I’d die young.”

“That’s true, Devi.”

“Oh My God! Do you also feel the same?”

“It appears that the Princess is kind of half-baked when it comes to palmistry.
Yes, one of the lines indicates a short life and an early death. But another line
clearly indicates that you’ll have a kind of re-birth while still living. And in that
new birth you’ll cross over the high seas to go to various countries. And in that
new life, Devi, you’ll be blessed with the happiest life that is denied even to the
mighty monarchs. And the lines clearly say that all these are going to happen
because of the love of a young man whom you met accidentally on a sea shore.
The lines also proclaim that the young man whom you met will be ever ready to
sacrifice his life to fulfil even the slightest of your whims.”

Parthibendran was carried away by the flow of his own words and suddenly
grabbed Nandini’s hands and touched his eyes with them.

Nandini forcefully freed her hands from his grasp and shouted at him.

“What the hell are you doing?”

“Forgive me, Devi. I forgot for a moment that these are your hands. I thought
these are two beautiful lotus flowers.”

“If only Pazhuvettaraiyar had seen you doing that you would have been
impaled.”

“Devi, my only grief is that I have just one life to sacrifice for you.”

“And why should you give your life in that gory way? Keep that life safe to help
this orphan.”

“Tell me what should I do, Devi?”

“The great Chozha Empire should not be destroyed by internal conflicts. I want
your help to save the Empire.”

“How?”

“Please bring your bosom friend Adithya Karikalan to Sambuvaraiyar’s house.
Sambuvaraiyar has a daughter. If that girl is married to Karikalan, my dreams
will come true.”

“Why this long prelude for this small task, Devi? I promise to bring Adithya
Karikalan to Kadambur. Then?”

“If Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter is married to Karikalan, half of the uprising
against the Empire will die. And if Madhuranthakan gets the Southern Half of
the Empire and Karikalan, the Northern Half, the other half of the uprising will
die. The Empire will be peaceful and strong.”

“Then?”

“I will be cleared of my bad name. And then I’ll fulfil my fate. I’ll fall into the
sea and drown.”

“I’ll rescue you from the depths of the sea. And then our new life will
commence. We’ll go to distant lands that lie beyond all the seas. And there I’ll
establish an empire for you.”

“I beg of you, please, don’t talk like that. I have been born in a line of chaste
women devoted to their husbands. I am the lawfully wedded wife of
Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

“Devi, it’s time now for you to tell me the truth. Why did you marry this old
man? Were you in love with him? Or did he force you to marry him?”

Nandini let out a long sigh. Her eyes went up. It appeared as if she was reliving
some old, bitter memories.

“Poor soul, the old man is not to be blamed. I married him out of my own free
will and volition.”

“But why, Devi? What did you find in him?”

“Nothing. I wanted to live in a palace. I wanted power and authority. So I
married him.”

“I don’t believe you.”

“Yes, it is difficult to believe. And yet it is the truth. Right from my childhood
days a girl had been ridiculing me because I was poor and I was an orphan. She
told me that I don’t have the right to play with the children of the Royal
Household. I could not bear the insults heaped on me; I committed this grave
sin.”

“Who’s the girl who insulted you, Devi?”

“You don’t know? You can’t guess?”

“Princess Kunthavai?”

“Yes.”

“I’ll teach her a lesson some day.”

“No need, Prince. God has already punished her. Her darling brother and her
dear lover have perished. I now pity her condition.”

“The punishment is not adequate for that evil woman.”

“If only you fulfil my request – the one I told you a little while ago – then her
punishment will be complete. Her dream of being the sole power in an undivided
Chozha Empire will be crushed.”

“I’ll fulfil your wishes, Devi? What’ll be my reward?”

“Anything you name, Prince. I only hope that you don’t ask anything that’d
make me swerve from the code of morality prescribed for a married woman of
Tamilnadu.”

“Devi, I hear that a new religion is born in the West. It has spread to Arabia,
Baghdad and Persia. According to the tenets of that religion a husband and wife,
if they do not like each other, can part ways. There are even some rituals
prescribed for that parting ceremony. The women can remarry.”

“I too have heard that, Prince.”

“Let’s go to that country, Devi. And let’s get converted to that religion.”

“I too have dreamt like that at times. But will that happen?”

“Why not, Devi? It’ll happen for sure if only you agree. I will come with you.
We’ll get into a ship and cross the seas. We’ll get down at a far off land. And
with the power of my sword I’ll establish an Empire in that land. I’ll make you
sit on a throne studded with the precious gems. I’ll adorn your head with a crown
whose shine will hurt the eyes of spectators. I am born in this world only for
that. And it is only for that task, that I survived all the wars which I have fought
till now.”

“Prince, see there. My husband is returning. His boat has reached the shore. Be
quiet. We’ll discuss these things later.”

“Later means when, Devi?”

“Come with us to Thanjavur. If you are not invited as a guest, come at least as a
prisoner.”

“Your invitation is good enough for me, Devi.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s boat reached the shore. The furious old man walked towards
them.

Nandini and Parthibendran stood up. When the old man saw them sparks were
flying in his eyes. The mere thought that they were sitting in that place and
chatting added fuel to his fury. And there was no way to express that fury.
Impotent, inexpressible anger made the old man restless.

“Darling, did you examine the ship? Did you enquire the sailors? Is this man
telling the truth?” Nandini asked in her sweetest voice.

The old man was pacified.

“Yes, Devi. He tells the truth. The fruit of Chozhas’ penance, the darling of the
Chozha clan, the apple of the eyes of Tamilnadu People, the one and only
Arulmozhivarman is dead.”

And then he turned towards the Pallava prince.

“And this scoundrel killed him! The heartless killer.” Pazhuvettaraiyar roared.

“Your Highness, I am in no way responsible for that. Please don’t blame me. I
am not the reason for the Prince’s death. A ghoul in the form of a woman is
responsible. A ghost who is keeping the entire Chozha Empire under her sway is
responsible for this calamity. Not me.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s fury broke all boundaries. Poor old man, he thought that
Parthibendran was alluding to Nandini.

“What the hell did you say?” Pazhuvettaraiyar picked up a spear from the
ground and lifted it to strike the Pallava prince.

Nandini held his hand firmly.

“Oh, dear, what are you doing? Your spear has killed numerous enemies. Don’t
let it be stained by the blood of an honoured guest.”

“Honoured Guest, my foot! Devi, didn’t you hear what he spoke about you a few
seconds ago?”

Too much of anger made him stagger.

“Did he say that about me? Please confirm. And if it is true I’ll take revenge
with my knife. I’ll finish him off saving you the bloody mess.”

“Am I crazy, Your Highness, to talk about the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur in such
a derogatory manner? I was alluding to the evil seductress living in Pazhaiyaarai.
It was Princess Kunthavai who gave a secret message to the Prince through a
young man called Vandhiya Thevan. And it was only to save the life of that
ruffian did our Prince jump into the sea against my desperate pleas. Princess
Kunthavai is squarely responsible for the death of the Prince.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar was a little ashamed because of his hasty conclusion. But he
hid that and shouted at Parthibendran.

“Don’t try to cover things up. You too are responsible for the untimely death of
our Prince. How did you let the Prince jump into the sea during storm? Get lost.
Don’t stand here.”

Nandini intervened.

“Darling, I think it is prudent to take this man also to Thanjavur. It is better that
this man tells the Emperor what happened in the sea. Otherwise the death of the
Prince will be added to the long list of offences we are already charged with.
Some heartless people might even say that we plotted the death of the Prince.”

“I couldn’t care less. I am not afraid of them. And if anybody says that in my
presence I’ll have his tongue cut off.

“Parthibendra, why are you looking here and there? Do you have any plans to
escape?”

He clapped his hands. Four soldiers came running to him.

“Let this man be bound.”

The soldiers came near Parthibendran. He kept quiet till they came very close to
him. And then he showed his skills. The four soldiers were thrown away in four
directions.

“Your Highness, if I should be bound, let the bravest of the brave, the one who
has fought thirty six wars and has sixty four wounds on his body, the one and
only, Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar bind me. I won’t let anybody else come near me.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar was pleased.

“You hail from the brave Pallava clan. There is no doubt about it. If you are
willing to come with us to Thanjavur then there is no need to bind you.”

“That’s my wish too. I want to meet the Emperor in person and tell him what
happened on the high seas. I don’t want somebody to blame me tomorrow for the
death of the Prince.”

“Then let’s go. Right now!”

They could hear an owl hooting from the nearby forest.

Nandini looked in the direction of the sound. The two men did not notice the
change of expression on her face.

“The Kodikkarai forest is pretty strange. See, an owl hoots in the morning.
Strange!” – Parthibendran.

They could hear the hooting sound twice.

Nandini turned to her husband.

“Do you think we should leave right now? Why don’t we stay for a day more?
It’s quite possible that the Prince might hold on to some logs and reach the
shore.”

“Parthibendra, see, how intelligent my wife is! This didn’t strike us. Yes, let’s
stay here for a day more. I’ll post my men along the shore to look out for the
Prince.”

“I have no objection to that, Your Highness. But I have lost all hopes on the
Prince. If only you had seen the storm and the turbulence in the sea you will
understand me.”

The old man did not listen. He lined up his men along the shoreline for a
distance of ten miles. He was pacing near the shore. He was restless.

Chapter 4: The Screw Pine Bush

The boat was swinging like a cradle in the middle of the sea. It was difficult to
imagine that two days ago there were waves as tall as coconut palms.

The small boat had three passengers – Ponniyin Selvan, Vandhiya Thevan and
Poonkuzhali. Poonkuzhali handled the oars. She was however not keen on
rowing. She was eavesdropping on the conversation between the Prince and the
Vandhiya Thevan. The men were absorbed in their talk. They were surely not in
a hurry and did not mind the slow pace of the boat.

They talked about things they had to do once they reach the shores of
Kodikkarai. Vandhiya Thevan was vehemently arguing with the Prince. He did
not want the Prince to go to Thanjavur. He wanted him to visit Pazhaiyaarai first.
He had his own reasons:

“Your Excellency, your sister wants to see you. It is a grave emergency. I have
given my word to her that I’ll bring you to Pazhaiyaarai. I seek your help,
Prince, to honour my commitment.”

“And you want me to go against my father’s orders to help you honour your
commitment, right?

The Prince was angry.

“The orders did not come from your father, Your Excellency. They came from
the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

Vandhiya Thevan continued his passionate pleading.

“Your Excellency, even if you want to see your father, tell me, is it better to go as
a free man or as a prisoner of Pazhuvettaraiyars? If the people knew that you
have been arrested by the Pazhuvettaraiyars there will be a great uprising. Do
you want to see your dear motherland in a state of bloody mutiny? Is it good for
the Empire, Your Excellency? I am sure God Himself did not want that to
happen. That’s why he sent a whirlwind on our way. Do you want to start a
rebellion in Chozha Empire and that too against the wishes of God?”

Of all the arguments made by Vandhiya Thevan, this was the one that touched
the mind of the Prince and changed it a little. If the news of his arrest spread a
rebellion was bound to happen. Ponniyin Selvan knew that the people loved him.
He was lost in thoughts.

After some time he expressed his doubts.

“Even if I decide to go your way, how is it possible? I am sure the
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men will be waiting for me at Kodikkarai.”

“This girl will help us, Your Excellency. Even if there are hundreds of men at the
shore she will take us to the Kodikkarai forest without any of them seeing us.
Poonkuzhali, do you hear me? Can you do that?”

Poonkuzhali reached heaven as soon as she heard the question.. She was thrilled
by the fact that she was able to take the Prince on her boat. Of course she was
sad that she had to part ways from the Prince when they reached Kodikkarai. If
she had a chance to help him more.. .. .. .well nothing else could give her greater
happiness.

“If we go a little west of Kodikkarai there is a canal. The two banks of the canal
are covered by dense forest. There are marshlands in between. The place is not
easily approachable from Kodikkarai and that makes it very safe.”

“Can you leave us there, go to Kodikkarai and gather information?”

“Yes, I can. There are several places where the boat can be hidden.”

“Did you hear her, Your Excellency?”

“I did. You want me to enter my country like at thief. You want me to hide in my
own country like a criminal. Like a fugitive.”

Silence reigned for a while. The Prince asked Poonkuzhali,

“Samudrakumari, why have you stopped rowing?”

Poonkuzhali glanced at Vandhiya Thevan and resumed rowing.

“Poor girl! How long can she row the boat alone? Let me try my hands. Please
give me the oars, girl.” – Vandhiya Thevan.

The Prince knew the thoughts running in Vandhiya Thevan’s mind. He smiled.

“Dear Friend, your plan won’t work. I will be going neither to Pazhaiyaarai nor
to Thanjavur. It seems that God is going to take me to his abode.”

Vandhiya Thevan and Poonkuzhali were shocked. They saw the Prince. His body
was shivering.

Vandhiya Thevan moved closer to him.

“Your Excellency, what’s happening? Why are you shivering?”

“This is that terrible fever that has spread all over Lanka. Don’t you remember
seeing people suffering from this fever there? Those affected by this fever rarely
survive.”

Vandhiya Thevan had not been that shocked even while the lightning struck the
sails on his ship setting it on fire. The Prince’s words made him lose his
bearings.

The oar slipped from Poonkuzhali’s hands. It appeared as if life was ebbing
away from her. A little life was there only in her eyes. The rest of her was almost
dead. She stared at the shivering prince through those dim eyes.

Meanwhile the Prince started shivering more. The shivering was so much that at
one time his body was kind of jumping in its place.

“Your Excellency, I pray, please tell me what should I do. I can’t even think.
Where shall we take the boat? Poonkuzhali, is there a Doctor available in
Kodikkarai?” – Vandhiya Thevan was nervous.

Poonkuzhali, meanwhile, had lost her powers of speech. Prince
Arulmozhivarman stood up all of a sudden. His body could not sustain the
balance and was shaking.

“Please take me to my sister, Princess Kunthavai! Please.. “ The words were
shaky.

Vandhiya Thevan was excited on hearing those words. And in his excited state
he did not know what to do.

The Prince was standing on the boat struggling to balance himself. He screamed
all of a sudden, “Akka, I am coming. I am rushing to see you. Nobody can stop
me. I am coming.”

With these words he tried to jump into the sea.

Thank God, Vandhiya Thevan could now clearly understand the Prince’s
situation. He was sure that the Prince had become delirious. He sprang on the
Prince and prevented him from jumping into the sea.

The Prince was already a strong man. Added to that, the fever had endowed him
with a kind of brutal strength. He tried to get himself free from the clutches of
Vandhiya Thevan.

Vandhiya Thevan now knew that he could not stop the Prince on his own;
“Poonkuzhali, come here. Fast!” He screamed.

Poonkuzhali who had frozen in her place suddenly came back to life. She
jumped across the boat to hold the Prince’s hand firmly. The Prince’s strength,
which a little while ago resembled that of a mad elephant, ebbed out of him. The
Prince became a child.

“Akka, I’ll be at your feet waiting for your command. Please.. please.. don’t be
angry with me. If you too let me down who’ll be there for me, Akka?”

The Prince was sobbing now.

Vandhiya Thevan and Poonkuzhali made him lie on the boat. The Prince did not
move. His eyes were open. They were staring pointlessly at a distance.
Incoherent words burst out of his mouth.

Vandhiya Thevan realised that there was no point in asking for directions from
the Prince. He also realised that he had the tremendous responsibility of saving
Ponniyin Selvan from danger. At first he was a little overwhelmed. But then he
saw Poonkuzhali. She was an intelligent girl. And she was as much interested in
Prince’s well being as him. And there is always God and His compassion which
had so far saved him from many dangers.

“Poonkuzhali, why are you going slow? Let the boat go at the full speed.”

Poonkuzhali’s arms regained the lost strength. The boat started moving fast
tearing the waters of the sea.

Vandhiya Thevan was sitting near the Prince all the time. If the Prince, under the
influence of fever, tried to jump into the sea again… Vandhiya Thevan could not
even bring himself to think of that contingency. He was constantly looking at the
Prince watching even his slightest movements. At the same time his mind was
devising a plan about what was to be done.

“What do you think, girl? Shall we take the risk and go to Kodikkarai? I am sure
your family will help us to guard the Prince.”

“These are bad days. It’s very difficult to say who can be trusted and who cannot
be. My brother’s wife is a greedy woman. She’ll do anything for money. And
don’t forget the fact that my father is still under the employ of the
Pazhuvettaraiyars.

“Again, those Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men who came after you might still be in
Kodikkarai. There may me more men now expecting the arrival of the Prince.”

Vandhiya Thevan was surprised by her sharpness. He was happy that he was
with an intelligent woman during this hour of crisis.

“You mean to say that going to Kodikkarai will be dangerous?”

“Look! There!.. ”

Vandhiya Thevan saw a ship. Beyond the ship he could see the top of the light
house at Kodikkarai.

“Oh My God! That’s a huge ship. Whose ship can it be? Perhaps it could be
Parthibendran’s. In that case it will be better to take the Prince in that ship to
Kanchi.”

“It could be Pazhuvettaraiyar’s ship as well. Can you see anything behind the
ship?”

“Nothing, but the top of the light house at Kodikkarai.”

“Do you see anything odd there?”

“I don’t.”

“Well, I do. There are a lot of men standing on the top of the light house looking
at the sea.”

“Can they see this boat from there?”

“No. But if we move any closer to the shore they can see us.”

“Let’s not take chances. You told about the canal that goes into Kodikkarai
forest. Can we go there?”

“That’s the only option left to us. We’ll reach the place when it gets dark. Do
you remember hiding in a dark mandapam? This canal goes very close to that
palace. If you stay with the Prince for some time I’ll go into the village to gather
information for you.”

“Does the canal stop there, Poonkuzhali? Or does it go further?”

“It goes from Kodikkarai to Nagapattinam.”

Ponniyin Selvan meanwhile was delirious. He was talking to himself.

“Yes, Akka. What you told me about the Buddhist monks of Nagapattinam has
come true. The Great Federation of Buddhist Monks in Lanka offered me the

throne and the crown of Anuradhapura. But I refused, Akka. I am not interested
in ruling a Kingdom, Akka. Whatever else you say, I’ll obey. But please Akka
please.. don’t burden me with the responsibilities of a King. I will rather be
happy rowing a boat across the high seas. And listen, Akka. There’s a girl in
Kodikkarai.. she rows very well.”

While the Prince shivered in fever Poonkuzhali shivered in ecstasy. Vandhiya
Thevan was only furious. Both of them were anxious to know what the Prince
was going to say next. Consciousness returned to the Prince. He looked around
and asked in a feeble voice, “Haven’t we reached Kodikkarai yet?”

“We are almost there, Prince. See over there!”

Vandhiya Thevan now wanted to take instructions from the Prince. But the
Prince soon slipped into a state of delirium.

The Prince’s reference to Poonkuzhali in his imaginary conversation with his
sister had created a storm in Poonkuzhali’s mind. She was overcome with
shyness and could not look at the Prince or Vandhiya Thevan. She was looking
in the direction where the boat was going and rowing furiously.

The boat which was going towards the huge ship till then changed direction and
moved south west.

When it was almost dark the boat entered the canal dug out on the shore. As she
had told earlier the banks of the canal were covered with dense forest. The trees
were tall and dense.

Poonkuzhali parked the boat near the shore and talked to Vandhiya Thevan.

“Will you please take care of the boat for a while?”

Vandhiya Thevan nodded. Poonkuzhali jumped on to the shore. She climbed up
a tall tree and looked around. Then she climbed down fast.

“Thank God, we came here. I could see men for a distance of about ten miles
along the coast. There seems to be a lot of sound and action near the light
house.”

“Who could that be? Can you see them?”

“I can’t. But they must be Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men. Who else can be here at this
time? Whatever it is, let’s first go to the dark mandapam. I will go to my house
in the second hour of night and come back with the details.”

“What if somebody sees you at this time? If something happens to you then we
are doomed.”

“I have never cared about my life so far. But now I am really concerned. Until
the Prince is out of danger nothing will happen to me. I’ll be very careful.”

The boat started moving slowly into the canal. Poonkuzhali’s strokes were very
soft; she was careful that the rowing sound must not be heard. The two banks of
the canal were enveloped in darkness. The dark shadows of the trees on the
either sides fell on the water making it look darker still.

Bright little stars were slowly emerging out of the dark skies. It seemed that
those shiny little things were also concerned about the boat’s movements.
Perhaps they were as anxious as Vandhiya Thevan.

The tall trees on the banks swayed gently in the cool night breeze causing a
similar swaying in their shadows. The disturbance in the shadows affected the
reflection of stars in water. Images of stars restlessly wavering on the water was
a perfect representation of Vandhiya Thevan’s state of mind at that time

The boat must have been moving in the narrow canal for about twenty minutes.
But it appeared as if it has been moving for a hundred years. Poonkuzhali parked
the boat again.

Poonkuzhali reached the bank and started walking through the forest. Yes, her
body was going there. But her life and soul were in the boat she had left in the
canal. She was not bothered by thorny bushes, the ups and downs in the forest
path. She walked fast. When there were no obstacles on the way she actually ran.
She went towards the Kuzhakar Temple of Kodikkarai. When she reached the
gates of the temple she saw the priest locking up the temple for the day.

Poonkuzhali looked around, made sure that there was nobody else and went
before the priest blocking his way.

The priest was surprised to see her at that time. Though he knew her nature he
was a little shocked to see her at that time.

“Is that you, Poonkuzhali? I thought it was somebody else. The whole of
Kodikkarai is bustling with activity. Where were you all these days? I was
thinking of you only this evening. I have not heard from you for a long time…”

“I had gone out of town, Swamiji. I want to know what’s going on in the town.
Who are the men standing along the coast?”

“You really do not know anything? I am sure you have not yet gone near your
house.”

“I did go there. There were many strangers there. You know that I hate strangers.
So I came back.”

“The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar has come down. His Junior Queen has also come.
They have come with a large retinue. I also hear that a Pallava Prince by name
Parthibendra Pallavan has come. And he has come with terrible news. You don’t
know even that?”

“I don’t know. What’s that terrible news, Swamiji?”

“Our Prince Ponniyin Selvan came in that rascal’s ship. On the way it seems
there was a whirlwind. The Prince jumped into the sea to rescue somebody. And
he was not seen after that. They suspect that the Prince might reach the shores of

Kodikkarai. That’s why Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men are combing every inch of our
shore.

Even the Junior Queen is involved in the search operations. She came here a
little while ago. Poonkuzhali, people say all things about her. But they are all
wrong. She is an angel. When she learnt about the fate of the Prince she was in
tears. She was suffering, you know.”

“Oh, did she, Swamiji? I am pleased to hear you talking about the good qualities
of the Pazhuvur Queen. But tell me why did she come here?”

“She came here to pray to the Lord for the safety of the Prince. Not everyone
will have a heart made of stone like you do. Even after hearing that terrible news
about the Prince you are unshaken.”

“What’s the big deal, Swamiji? You were the one who said, not once but several
times, that everything is pre-ordained. Let’s not discuss those things now. I don’t
want to go to my house when it is swarmed by so many important people.
Whatever offerings you made to God please give it to me. I am famished. I’ll eat
them and stay here for the night.”

“You are strange, Poonkuzhali. When important people come to their place
people will like to meet them and make friends with them. But you are averse to
strangers. And if they are people holding high positions you only hate them
more. What can they do to you? Do you think they’ll eat you alive? Why should
you stay in the forest in the night, all alone, when you have your own house?”

“Swamiji, if you don’t want to give the offering to me, no issues. But please do

not run me down.”

“Oh My God! Why should I run you down, my child? I thought that this offering
may not be enough for you. Please take it.”

The Priest gave the food offered to Lord. It was wrapped in a piece of cloth.

Poonkuzhali got the parcel from him, opened it and had a look. “You are right. It
won’t be enough for my hunger. It’s not fair, Swamiji. To such a huge Lord you
are offering so little. Ok, let it be. What’s that you are carrying in that vessel,
Swamiji? Is it drinking water?”

“No! Milk. The one I used to perform an abhishekam on the Lord. I am taking it
for my child.”

“Please, Swamiji. Today, please let me be your child. Please give that milk to me
as well. You will be blessed, Swamiji.”

“Crazy girl. Take it. At least return the vessel to me.”

As Poonkuzhali got the milk from the priest she heard an owl hooting at a
distance.

Poonkuzhali was shocked. “What’s that sound, Swamiji?”

“You don’t know? That’s an owl hooting. There’s no dearth of owls in
Kodikkarai.”

The hooting was heard again.

“Yes, it sounds like an owl’s hooting.”

“Don’t worry, Poonkuzhali. Owls won’t hurt you. Please lock the doors from
inside. And sleep in the corridor.”

The priest walked away.

As soon as the priest left, Poonkuzhali wrapped the food in her waist cloth,
carried the milk jug and walked out of the temple.

She walked in the direction of the owl’s hooting. After a few steps she reached a
narrow canal. The banks of the canal were covered by dense screw pine bushes.

Poonkuzhali walked along one of the banks. She was hurt by the thorns in the
screw pine bushes. She did not mind that.

Screw pine flowers were in full blossom and the fragrance was very heady but
pleasant. But it did not have any effect on Poonkuzhali.

She walked on the banks silently. Her ears were very sharp. She knew she was in
a jungle. A jungle will not be silent during night. There would be would be
several kinds of noises. None of them attracted her attention.

She was expecting some other sound. And soon she heard it.

She could hear two persons talking in a whisper. One was a male voice and the
other, the voice of a woman.

Poonkuzhali hid herself completely. She overheard their conversation.

“Sorcerer, like you, everyone here believes that the Prince is drowned.
Pazhuvettaraiyar is shattered. But I don’t believe it.”

It was the voice of the woman.

Chapter 5: Rakkammal

When Pazhuvettaraiyar and Parthibendran went for a stroll on the beach Nandini
was left alone. She was staring at the waves lost in thoughts.

“Rani Amma”

Nandini turned around to see the owner of the voice.

It was the daughter-in-law of Thiyaga Vidangar, the caretaker of the light house.

“Who are you?”

“My name is Rakkammal.”

“What do you want?”

The woman did not respond. Instead she was looking pointedly at Nandini’s
face.

“Hey, you? What are you seeing? What’s there in my face?”

Rakkammal was startled by the tenor of the voice.

“Please forgive me, Your Highness. I was reminded of another face when I saw
yours. But I am sure it can’t be.”

“What nonsense?”

“There can’t be any relationship between that crazy mute woman and Your
Highness.”

“Who’s the mute woman?”

“She’s in Lanka. She is my father-in-law’s first cousin. She will visit us once in a
way.”

“What’s the connection between her and my face?”

“That’s why I said there can’t be any relationship between you two.”

“Then why were you reminded of that woman when you saw me?”

“The fault lies with my eyes, Your Highness. But your face.. .. face..”

“Does it resemble hers?”

“At first glance yes. . but.. “

“Rakkammal, tell me this. Is that dumb lady here now?”

“No. She used to come here. But very rarely.”

“If she comes again, will you bring her to me?”

“Why, Your Highness?”

“I am just curious to see somebody who looks like me.”

“I said that it was a mere hallucination.”

“Why are you so sure?”

“Your Highness, aren’t you from the Pandya Kingdom?”

“Yes, I am. You?”

“Me too. But the mute lady belongs to the Chozha Empire.”

“Even then it doesn’t matter. A few others have also spoken to me of that
woman. Will you please bring her to me? If you do so I’ll give you loads and
loads of money.”

“Your Highness, we may be able to bring a hurricane to your place but not her.
It’s impossible. She’ll never stick to any one place. She’ll never listen to
anybody. Didn’t I say she was crazy?”

“That’s okay. Tell me, why you came here.”

"Your Highness, a few days ago two men came here. They referred your name.”

“Why should they refer my name?”

“They told me that they were going to Lanka on your orders. I sent my husband
to row for them.”

“Has he returned?”

“No, he hasn’t, Your Highness. I am a little worried. If something happens to
him. .. .”

“Nothing will happen. Don’t worry. Even if something happens I’ll take care of
you. Do you know anything about the men who went with your husband?”

“They have come back, Your Highness. Didn’t you hear an owl’s hooting a little
while ago?”

“I heard. So what?”

“Didn’t you recognise the voice of the Sorcerer?”

“How do you know? Do you belong to his side?”

“Yes, Your Highness.”

Rakkammal drew some imaginary lines with her hand. Nandini understood. It
was their code word.

Nandini was surprised. She was staring at the woman for some time.

“Do you know where they are now?”

“The Sorcerer is waiting to see you.”

“Why should he wait? He could have come straight to me.”

“The Sorcerer does not want to meet the Pallava Prince who has come to
Kodikkarai. He had met him at Lanka. The Sorcerer does not want to see your
husband either.”

“Did you see the Sorcerer?”

“I heard the owl’s hooting and went to see him. He asked me to bring you. He is
hiding on the banks of the canal near the Kuzhakar Temple over there. Can you
come with me, Your Highness?”

“How can I?”

“You can tell others that you are visiting the temple.”

“That’s a good idea. But do we need somebody else for security?”

“No need. If necessary we can take Chendan Amudhan with us.”

“Who’s he?”

“The son of the mute lady at Thanjavur.”

“Oh My God! How many mute women are there!”

“A curse runs in the family. Some are born dumb. Others can talk and yet they
are dumb. My husband talks very rarely. In fact I have asked him not to open his
mouth unless it is absolutely necessary.”

“Does the mute woman at Lanka have any children?”

“I heard that she once got twins. Nobody knows what happened to those
children. I have been dying to know that well-guarded secret. But I have not
been successful so far.”

“Why should the Thanjavur man come here?”

“He came here looking for his cousin Poonkuzhali. She is not here. He’s waiting
for her.”

“Where has she gone?”

“Thank God you asked. I wanted to tell that myself. Two days after my husband
took the Sorcerer on his boat, two more men came. They were chased by
Pazhuvur men. They wanted to capture one of those men. But my sister-in-law
took that man in her boat to Lanka that night itself.”

“Does she know how to row a boat?”

“She does very little besides rowing. When she is not in her boat she will be
going around the forests of Kodikkarai. She knows every nook and corner of this
forest.”

“Now that she has not yet returned from Lanka what do you deduce?”

“These people are screaming that some big guy has fallen into the sea. I am not
very sure of that. We can be sure only after seeing Poonkuzhali.”

“That girl might have been drowned as well.”

“Impossible! The sea is her cradle. Moreover.. . .. “

Rakkammal hesitated.

“Moreover… “

Nandini insisted.

“I was on the top of the light house a short while ago. I could see a boat at a
distance.”

“Then.. “

“It did not reach the shore.”

“What could have happened?”

“Somebody might have noticed the unusual crowd on the shore and might have
diverted the boat to the canal near the marshland.”

“Is that possible?”

“Nothing is impossible for Poonkuzhali. The Thanjavur man – I mean Chendan
Amudhan – was with me at the top of the light house. He too had similar
thoughts.”

“Ok, let it be. Shall we go to Kuzhakar Temple now?”

“Can we take Chendhan Amudhan with us?”

“No. Let him go searching for his cousin. Let’s not stand between them.”

The two women started walking towards the Kuzhakar Temple. Rakkammal, like
Poonkuzhali, knew about the treacherous quick-sands on the way and guided her
carefully towards the temple.

The temple priest was quite surprised to see the two women.

“Your Excellency, what’s this? Why did you come alone at this time? Without
your usual retinue? You should have sent word to me about your coming here. I
could have organised a grand reception for you.”

“This is not the time for such things, Swamiji. A great calamity has struck the
Chozha Empire. They say that the darling of our people, our Great Prince,
Arulmozhivarman has drowned in the sea. I’ve come with the only mission of
praying to Kuzhakar to return the Prince safely to us.”

“Nothing of that sort will happen, Your Highness. You need not worry on that
account. The Sea-God, Samudraraja, will never have the heart to hurt the
Prince.”

“How are you so sure, Swamiji?”

“It’s in his stars, Your Highness. How can a person born to rule the whole world
die in the sea? Pray to Lord Kuzhakar. He’ll ensure the safe return of the
Prince.”

He then showed the oil lamp before the Lord and handed over the sacred ash.

“Your Highness, I am really happy to see you in such exalted position.”

“Do you know me, Swamiji? My past life?”

“I do, Your Excellency. I’ve seen you in Pazhaiyaarai and also in the temple on
the banks of River Vaigai. Is your brother Thirumalai doing fine? What’s he
doing now?”

“He is now immersed in the composition of Azhwars. He has been travelling to
propagate the Azhwar’s works. It’s long since I saw him.”

“He too is sad, Your Highness. He told me that he has not seen you ever since
you became the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur.”

“I am helpless in this matter, Swamiji. My husband and my in-laws are all
staunch Saivites. My brother is a Vaishnava fanatic. In fact he has assumed the
name Azhwarkkadian, which means a slave of the Azhwars. To fight with
Saivites is his favourite hobby. How can I invite him home? Should I not honour
the sentiments of those in my husband’s household?”

“What you say is true, Your Highness. Let Azhwarkkadian go to hell. You
should never hurt your husband.”

A little later the two women took leave of the Priest.

“Are you going alone? Wait. I’ll come with you.”

“No need, Swamiji. You need not hurry on our account. This lady is quite
conversant with the locality. Moreover today the whole of Kodikkarai is abuzz
with activity. We’ll be safe. We take leave of you.”

The two women came out of the temple.

As soon as they were out of sight of the Priest, Rakkammal grabbed Nandini’s
hand and took her behind the temple. In a few minutes they reached the bank of
the canal which was dense with screw pine bushes.

With the faint light coming from the distant stars they walked along the bank of
the canal.

Chapter 6: Poonkuzhali’s Shock

Poonkuzhali was hiding behind the screw pine bushes holding her breath.
Nandini and the Sorcerer were talking in a very low voice; yet Poonkuzhali
could hear most of their conversation.

Nandini told the Sorcerer that she did not believe in the story that Prince
Arulmozhivarman was drowned.

“Oh, Queen, you have never believed me. But tell me the reason for your
disbelief this time?”

“Haven’t you heard of the Prince’s horoscope? The Priest of the Kuzhakar
Temple here spoke about it just now.”

“Sheer stupidity. Don’t you know my magical powers are greater than the
powers of planets and stars? Do you know that I created the storm in an
otherwise calm sea using all my powers of magic? The spy from Kanchi did not
believe it at first. He must have changed his mind during the final moments of
his life when he drowned in the sea.”

“Did you see him drown?”

“What’s the difference? I saw the ship going up in flames. And he was in it.”

“I heard that the Prince jumped into the sea to rescue him from the burning
ship.”

“But did the Prince return?”

“No, he did not return to the Pallavan’s ship.”

“Which means he’s dead. Two of our enemies perished on the same day.

“I don’t buy your story. Something tells me that both of them are alive. Do you
know Poonkuzhali?”

“I know her very well. She was a nuisance for us in Lanka. She also might have
died in the whirlwind.”

“No, that did not happen. A boat was spotted at a distance sometime ago.
Rakkammal swears that she saw it from the light house. And the boat suddenly
disappeared. She says that there were three people in the boat.”

“Then you take the old man away from this place immediately. I’ll stay here and
take care of them.”

“What’s the problem in our staying here?”

“If the old man is here he’ll accord a royal welcome to the Prince and take him
to Thanjavur. Our work will become difficult.”

“Sorcerer, I too have this doubt. Why should they die, if everybody agrees to
crown Madhuranthakan?”

“Lady, don’t try to act like a woman. The Kanchi spy knows all our secrets. By
this time he would have told everything to the Prince. So please leave the place
before dawn tomorrow.

“Rakkammal, if Poonkuzhali had brought them in her boat where will she hide
them in the forest?”

“There’s a hidden mandapam in the forest. That’s her secret living place. She hid
the Kanchi spy in that mandapam for a whole day. I found that out only much
later.”

“Good. I know the place. I’ll go there and wait for them. Queen, how is the
Emperor? Any news about him?”

“Which Emperor?”

“I’ll never call that sick man Sundara Chozhan an Emperor. I am enquiring about
our Emperor.”

“I heard that he is doing well. But that was ten days ago. It has been very long
since I saw him last.”

“That’s all right, Queen. Please leave the place. What are you going to do with
that foolish Pallavan?”

“We are taking him with us to Thanjavur.”

“Be careful with him.”

“There is no need to worry about him. He is ready to give his life for fulfilling
the slightest of my whims.”

“Even then it pays to be a little more careful. You were deceived by that spy
from Kanchi, Vandhiya Thevan. Weren’t you?”

“Yes. That’s true. That’s why I want to see him alive.”

“Bury that desire deep into the sand. That’s not going to happen at all.”

They started moving away from that place. Poonkuzhali hid perfectly behind the
fragrant screw pine bushes. Thank God they went in the opposite direction.

Poonkuzhali was shocked what she heard. When she came to know about
dangers surrounding Ponniyin Selvan, her limbs started shivering in fear. Her
eyes became dark and her throat parched. She was confused. She started running
towards the boat.

The Prince is in the grip of a bad fever. Pazhuvettaraiyar is waiting with his
army to imprison the Prince. Killers are waiting for a chance to finish him off.
And the killers are aided by that devil in the form of a woman, Nandini. Even the
Pallava Prince is now in her net. The only place where the Prince can be safely
hidden is now known to the enemy.

Poonkuzhali knew that the safety of the Prince was her greatest responsibility
now. The problem was too much for her little brain. She was confused. She had a
kind of fear which she had never experienced earlier in her life.

‘Have I lost my way in the forest? Am I moving in circles, coming to the same
place again and again? What if I met any of the enemies on the way? What kind
of explanation can I give them? How can I hope to escape from them?’

‘No, no. I am not lost. I am on the right track. I can see the canal. I left the boat
at the corner.’

Poonkuzhali sprinted to the place. Her heart skipped a beat for the boat was not
there.

‘Oh My God! Where is the boat?’

“Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men might have come here when I was away. They must
have arrested the Prince and Vandhiya Thevan. Even that is okay. Perhaps
something more terrible has happened.

Or perhaps Vandhiya Thevan might have carried the sick Prince to the dark
mandapam. That would be disastrous because the killers will be waiting there.
Oh My God! What a serious lapse!

Poonkuzhali wanted to run to the dark mandapam right away. She started
running through the rarely trodden forest path. Half way through she strongly
suspected whether she had lost the way.

‘Oh My God! What’s this? I hear the sound of footsteps. Somebody is following
me. Who could it be? And why? Perhaps it’s that terrible Sorcerer? Even then
why should I fear? All I need to do is take out the knife hidden in my waist.
Whosoever it may be, why should I fear? Why should I flee?’

‘No, no. I will have to flee. This is not the time to fight with anybody. I don’t have
the strength in my hands. I might miss the mark if I try to hit the enemy with my
knife. And I have a duty to guard my life at any cost. If anything happens to me
what will be the fate of the Prince? Didn’t that fellow Vandhiya Thevan caution
me? Didn’t I promise him to guard my life and come back safe?’

The forest was dense now. She started running. The person who was chasing her
also ran with an equal speed. Terrified by the sound of the human footsteps the
birds screeched and flew in all the directions. The foxes ran away from their
dens. The sleeping boars ran in all the directions. The deer were also running.
One of the deer almost sprang on her, pushed her aside while frantically running

for its life. All these did not affect the person who was chasing her. Poonkuzhali
could hear the footsteps as well as the sound of breathing. Poonkuzhali was
exhausted. And the exhaustion turned into fury.

She decided to stop and meet the enemy face to face.

Chapter 7: The Forest Song

Poonkuzhali was more furious than afraid. She stopped running. She was ready
to face her opponent. Precisely at that moment a melodious song wafted towards
her.

“Oh my Lord, one whose body is of golden hue
The one who wears a tiger skin on his waist
And a shining Konrai flower adorns his glowing red hair.”

She immediately recognised the voice. Yes, it was her cousin Chendan
Amudhan. She laughed forgetting for a moment that the sound of foot-steps was
now heard in a different direction.

“Athan is that you?”

“Yes, Poonkuzhali.”

“Where are you?”

“Here I am.”

“You frightened me Athan. Why are you stalking me?”

“I had to travel for several days and nights from Thanjavur to come here. I have
come here only to see you, only to hear your sweet voice. But even after coming
here I could not see you. I’ve been longing to see you for days, Poonkuzhali.
And then suddenly I spotted you here and came running after you. But tell me
dear, what were you running from? Please sing a song for me, dear.”

“In the middle of the forest! At this time of the night! Right place and right time!

Poonkuzhali was at her sarcastic best.

“If you don’t sing, then I will."I am going to wake up all the sleeping animals
and make them run for their lives.”

“Oh My Lord! The crazy man! The Being of love.. “

“ENOUGH! ENOUGH! WILL YOU PLEASE STOP SINGING?”

“THEN PROMISE ME YOU’LL SING.”

Amudhan shouted and then suddenly lowered his voice to a whisper.
“Poonkuzhali, somebody else is stalking you. I sang aloud only to warn you.
That guy was talking secretly with your brother’s wife this evening. Do you
know him?”

And then Amudhan shouted: “TELL ME WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO.
ARE YOU GOING TO SING OR SHALL I? MY LORD SHIVA DANCED IN
THE CREMATION GROUND. I AM SURE YOU CAN SING HIS PRAISES
IN THIS FOREST.”

“YOU WANT A SONG? HERE YOU GO. PLEASE DON’T BE ANGRY
WITH ME.”

Poonkuzhali started to sing.

“Oh my dear parrots! The poovai birds!
Unable to forget the Lord of Thiruvarur
Who is the very eye of righteousness
My bangles refuse to be on my hand
Sleep has taken leave of me!
And birds, will you please tell this
To my Lord?”

She sang in a high pitch voice. And then lowered her voice to a whisper to say:

“Amudha, how did you know that I have come here?”

“Poonkuzhali! From the top of the light house I could see a boat coming. I
guessed it was you and came looking for you. At the same time some of the
Pazhuvur men were here. I could not see you in the boat. But I saw my friend
Vandhiya Thevan and the Prince. I told Vandhiya Thevan about the Pazhuvur
men. Then we carried the Prince safely to the dark mandapam.”

“OH MY GOD! That’s a blunder. What happened to the boat?”

“If somebody sees the boat we’ll be in trouble. So we have sunk the boat in the
canal.”

Amudhan again raised his voice.

“WHY DID YOU STOP POONKUZHALI? SING THE REST OF THE
SONG... “

“SORRY, I’VE FORGOTTEN. THERE’S A SONG ABOUT THIS
KODIKKARAI KUZHKAR. DO YOU REMEMBER THAT? WILL YOU
PLEASE SING THAT FOR ME?”

“I DO REMEMBER.” Chendan Amudhan spoke aloud and started to sing.

What wretchedness is to dwell like this?

My forlorn eyes did see,

On the shore lashed by harsh winds blowing landward,

In utter solitude, with none for company,

Lord Shiva, Kuzhakar of Kodikkarai."

As soon as the song was over Poonkuzhali asked him in a whisper:

“Athan, what happened to the person who was following me? Has he gone? Or
is he hiding somewhere?”

“I could not hear the sound of his footsteps ever since we stopped here. He
should be hiding somewhere near here. Do you know him?”

Poonkuzhali sensed something and raised her voice:

“WHY NOT? YOU MEAN THE SONG ABOUT THE OWLS OF
KODIKKARAI SUNG BY THE SAINT SUNDARAR? HERE YOU GO.

My dear Lord, Kuzhakar, you chose to
Live in the middle of a dense jungle

Where the owls and kites
Frighten the young maidens
With none to give you company
But the hunters woodcutters and all evil men.

“SEE AMUDHA EVEN IN THE DAYS OF SUNDARAMURTHY THE OWLS
HAVE BEEN HOOTING IN THIS FOREST. BUT TODAY MEN MIMIC THE
NOCTURNAL BIRD. I HEARD THE VOICE OF AN OWL A LITTLE
WHILE AGO. CAN YOU GUESS WHO THAT EVIL MAN COULD BE?”

“Let me try to hoot like an owl. Tell me if it’s exactly like an owl’s hooting. ”

Poonkuzhali hooted like an owl thrice.

“Oh My God! That’s exactly like an owl’s sound. I have heard you singing sweet
devotional songs. Who taught you this horrible sound?”

“I learnt it from a sorcerer. If you want your sorcery to succeed you should learn
to hoot like an owl.”

“Do you know sorcery too?”

“Just a little. Do you want to test me?”

“How can I test you here in the middle of a forest?”

“Let me tell you. A man is snooping on us right now. He is somewhere very near
us and has been eavesdropping on our conversation. You don’t believe me? You
can verify.”

As Poonkuzhali was saying these words a rustling sound was heard. Sorcerer
Ravidasan came out from the hiding. He was laughing aloud.

“Oh Girl, I thought you know a few tricks. I am amazed to know that you know
sorcery as well.”

“Oh My God! The heinous villain!”

“Hey Girl, do you know me?”

“You tried to kill our Prince in Lanka. You could not do that. And then you
created a whirlwind in a calm sea and drowned the Prince and his friend.”

“How do you know for sure that they have drowned? Did you see?”

“Their dead bodies were washed out to the shore. I buried them in the Ghost
Island. Traitor! Sinner! May your sorcery go to ruins! May you be cursed!”

“Are you trying to deceive me? Didn’t you do something to reverse my spell and
revive them?”

“Oh My God! How did you know that?”

“This Ravidasan has an inner eye apart from his usually sharp outer eyes. I can
see something happening a thousand miles away from me, thanks to my magical
powers.”

“Then why do you ask me?”

“I just wanted to test your skill. Tell me, where have you hidden them?
Otherwise I’ll burn you two to ashes right here in this forest.”

Ravidasan’s outer eyes were sparkling like flames.

“Are you going to tell the truth or not? Ohm Hreem Hraam Vashat! I am going to
show you my powers.”

Poonkuzhali was shivering in fear. She held Chendan Amudhan tightly and told
him in a barely audible whisper.

“I am going to run from here. You try to stop him.”

And then spoke to the sorcerer in a loud voice.

“Please spare me. Don’t do anything. I’ll tell you where they are hiding. Follow
me.”

She led him in the direction opposite to the dark mandapam.

The Sorcerer tried to follow her. Chendan Amudhan held him.

Poonkuzhali started to run. The Sorcerer pushed Amudhan away and started to
run behind Poonkuzhali.

If Poonkuzhali ran like a deer, the Sorcerer ran like a hunter eager to kill the
animal. Even then he found it difficult to keep pace with her.

The Sorcerer thought of abandoning the chase. Poonkuzhali looked exhausted.
She stopped running. The Sorcerer started running faster; Poonkuzhali also ran.
Chendan Amudhan tried his best to keep abreast of the two.

Amudhan thought of running to the dark mandapam and warn Vandhiya Thevan
of the impending danger. But he could not leave Poonkuzhali at the hands of the
evil sorcerer.

Poonkuzhali climbed up a sand dune. She clapped her hands to invite the
sorcerer there. The Sorcerer, gasping for breath, ran to her side. He wanted to
hold her and slap her on her face. Poonkuzhali spoke, “See there! They are my
lovers.”

Ravidasan looked in the direction pointed out by her. He saw what Vandhiya
Thevan saw earlier in the story. It was a marsh land. There were sudden fires
which disappeared as suddenly as they appeared.

Ravidasan knew the scientific reason behind that ghastly appearance. And yet
his hairs stood on end.

“Oh Sorcerer! If you know any real sorcery, try to drive away these fire-mouthed
devils. They have been torturing me.”

Ravidasan was furious.

“Hey Girl, are you trying to hoodwink me?” – he roared.

“Why should I?”

“Didn’t you promise to show me the place where the Prince and Vandhiya
Thevan are hidden? Why have you dragged me here?”

“I told you several times that they are dead. You never believed me. What else

can I do?”

“Is the Prince dead? Can you swear?”

“Why should I? Look at the sky.”

Ravidasan complied. He could see the comet.

“Don’t you know when a comet appears on the sky somebody from the King’s
family will die. It has happened.”

“Ok, give me the vessel in your hand. Is there anything to drink? I have been
running for long and I am very thirsty.”

Poonkuzhali started to run again. She jumped from the dune and ran towards
those ‘fire-mouthed devils.’ Ravidasan lost his sense. He now wanted to catch
Poonkuzhali and wring her neck. Blinded by rage he ran behind her.

After running for some time Poonkuzhali suddenly stopped, moved a little bit
away and bent down. Ravidasan who was running at full speed could not stop
where Poonkuzhali was standing. He could stop only a few feet beyond her. He
tried to spring on her but failed miserably.

What happened to my legs? Why do they refuse to take orders from me? Why are
they not moving? Why are they suddenly cold? What is this the chill appears to

be slowly spreading up from my feet? No, no, the chill is not going up. The feet
are sinking.

Ravidasan looked down. His legs were caught in the mire of a quicksand. Inch
by inch his feet were sinking in the mud.

Ravidasan could now sense the danger. He tried to wriggle out of the mud. He
tried to pull out his legs from the mire. His efforts were not fruitful. It appeared
as if a ghost was beneath him and was pulling him down with devilish strength.

Poonkuzhali laughed out loud.

“Sorcerer, what are you wondering? Caught in the mouth of the ghost? Why
don’t you try your magical powers now?”

Ravidasan was shivering – both in anger and in mortal fear.

“Is it your work? You, evil woman!”

He wrung his hands.

“You wanted to wring my neck, right? Instead you wring your hands.”

Ravidasan had the sense to control his anger.

“Girl, I swear upon God, I won’t hurt you. Please give me a hand. And lift me up
from this hell.”

Poonkuzhali laughed once again.

“No, I can’t. Call those ghosts which are bound by your spell. Leave me alone.”

Ravidasan had gone thigh-deep in the mire. His face wore a ghastly appearance.
His eyes shone like flaming torches.

He stretched his hands and caught hold of the firm bank beyond the mire. He
caught hold of the shrubs to pull himself out from the mire. But he could not
move his legs which were buried deep into the quicksand.

“Hey Girl, may you be blessed. Please save me.” – The Sorcerer screamed.

Chendan Amudhan arrived at the scene. He understood Ravidasan’s plight. A
wave of compassion flashed through his eyes.

“Come let’s go.” Poonkuzhali was in a hurry.

“But we can’t leave him here?”

“Do you want to see him burying himself in mud? We don’t have the time.”

“No, No. If we leave him like this, I’ll be seeing this ghastly sight in my dreams
for the rest of my life. Let’s save him.”

“Athan, remember that he tried to kill me. He wanted to wring my neck.”

“God will surely punish him for his sins. Let’s do our duty. Let’s save him.”

“Ok, then give me your scarf.”

Amudhan gave his scarf and Poonkuzhali tied its one end to the bushes near the
quick sand. She gave the other end to Ravidasan.

“Look here, Sorcerer. Hold this end of the scarf. Don’t try to pull it hard. The
bushes will be uprooted and then nobody can save you. Hold it lightly. Don’t try
to come out. You can’t. Somebody might see you in this position tomorrow
morning. They’ll pull you out.”

“Oh My God! Do I have to spend the whole night here? I can’t. I beg of you.
Please kill me.”

Poonkuzhali ignored his pleas. She grabbed Amudhan’s hands and started
running. They could hear the pathetic screams of the sorcerer till they climbed
the dune and got down on the other side.

When they could no longer hear Ravidasan’s screams, Poonkuzhali started to
talk.

“Athan, you came at the right time. How did you come here? And why?”

“You know after I was released from the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s dungeons I did not
want to stay in Thanjavur. Pazhuvettaraiyar’s soldiers and spies were giving a lot
of trouble to me. So I went to Pazhaiyaarai. I met Princess Kunthavai there. She
sent me here. She told me that the Prince’s life is in danger and wanted me to tell
Vandhiya Thevan to take the Prince to the Choodamani Buddhist Monastery in
Nagapattinam. Also, I wanted to see you and hear your songs.”

“You have chosen probably the best time to hear my songs! Princess Kunthavai
is right. The Prince is in danger. There have been several attempts on his life.
Added to that, he is now in the grip of a terrible fever.”

“Yes, I saw. Vandhiya Thevan and I carried him to the hidden mandapam. Oh
My God, that was an ordeal. Poonkuzhali, the monks at the Choodamani
Monastery are expert doctors. They alone can cure the Prince.”

“But how to take him there?”

“Through the canal.”

“How can we go? You’ve sunk my boat.”

“It’s near the shore. We can retrieve it.”

“Then we should leave this place tonight. All of us can’t go in that small boat.”

“No need, Poonkuzhali. We have discussed that. Vandhiya Thevan will go to
Pazhaiyaarai from here. We two will take the Prince with us to Nagapattinam.”

Poonkuzhali became ecstatic. Another journey with the Prince. And that too in
the canal in her boat up to Nagapattinam. She started praying. ‘There should not
be any dangers on the way.’

They reached the Dark Mandapam. When they were at the entrance Amudhan
clapped his hands.

“WHO IS THAT?”

Vandhiya Thevan roared like a wounded lion.

“It’s me. Chendan Amudhan.”

“Anybody else with you?”

“My cousin. Poonkuzhali.”

Vandhiya Thevan came out to check.

“Are you sure nobody else is there?”

“No. Why this suspicion?”

“Ssh. Don’t shout. The Prince is sleeping. Somebody came here a little while
ago. I thought it was you and came out. It was not you. He looked like the
Sorcerer.”

“Then?”

“I heard your song. I was wondering, ‘Why this man chose this time to sing?”
But thank God, the Sorcerer heard your song and went away. Did you see him?”

“Yes, we did.”

“What did you do with him?”

“I didn’t do anything. This girl has made him stand hip-deep in quagmire.”

“I heard her voice as well.”

“You are right. She too sang.”

“The Prince became conscious on hearing her voice. He asked me, ‘Who’s
singing?’ I told him, ‘It’s the boat girl.’ The Prince was listening to the song and
then he went to sleep.”

Poonkuzhali was excited.

“She not only sang but also hooted like an owl.”

“I heard that too. I thought some miracle is happening in the forest. I thought
you two – love birds – are celebrating the Festival of Spring in the forest.”

“Why are you wasting the time in empty talk?” Poonkuzhali was annoyed.

“What else can I do? I have to while away the night.”

“No, if we stay here till morning then we’ll all be killed. We should leave the
place right now.”

They heard the foxes howling at a distance. And they could also hear the hooting
of the owl.

Chendan Amudhan trembled. He could visualise the Sorcerer half-buried in
quick sand, surrounded by the howling foxes closing in for their prey. The
Sorcerer must be trying to drive them away by hooting like an owl.

Vandhiya Thevan and Chendan Amudhan lifted the Prince without waking him
up. They started walking towards the canal. Poonkuzhali followed them.

When they reached the canal, the moon had risen. They made the Prince lie
against the tree and left Poonkuzhali stand guard for the Prince and stepped into
the water.

They reached for the sunken boat and slowly lifted it up with great effort.

Prince Arulmozhivarman woke up. He spoke in a feeble voice, “I’m thirsty.”

Poonkuzhali who was by his side gently poured the temple-milk in his mouth.

As soon as he drank some milk the Prince spoke again.

“Is that you, Poonkuzhali? I thought I had died and had gone to heaven. And
some beautiful angel was pouring the elixir of life into my mouth.”

Chapter 8: Oh My God! The Ghost!

The tree in heaven, eulogised as the Karpaga Vriksham, in our mythology, was
showering its most colourful flowers on Poonkuzhali. The celestial beings were
pouring out music from their divine instruments.

The soft words of the prince had a magical effect on Poonkuzhali. Her body
became the yaazh, the mythological musical instrument, playing celestial music.

“Your Excellency, I am not a celestial being. I am after all the same poor boatgirl. And what you drank is not the elixir of life; but milk offered to the Lord at
the Kuzhakar temple.”

“You may deny; but I won’t believe your words. Aren’t you the daughter of the
Lord of Rain, Lord Varuna? Aren’t you the Samudrakumari, the ocean’s
daughter? How many times have you saved me from death? How am I going to
repay your kindness?”

The Prince’s words were very clear.

“Your Excellency, please let this poor girl stay with you for one more day.”

“How can I do that? I should leave for Pazhaiyaarai right now.”

“No, Your Excellency. We have just now got a message that we should take you
to Nagapattinam.”

“You got a message? From whom?”

“From the Princess, Your Excellency.”

“Who is that other guy who is pushing the boat along with Vandhiya Thevan?”

“My cousin, Chendan Amudhan. Princess Kunthavai has sent the message
through him. We have been asked to take you to Choodamani Monastery at
Nagapattinam.”

“Aha! Has my sister changed her mind? Has she given up her desire to crown
me as the King? I have always wanted to join a Buddhist Monastery. I’ll become
a monk. I will go on a pilgrimage to far off countries - Java, China,
Mayirudangam, and Mappalam. I am a lucky man. Come, Poonkuzhali. Let’s
go.”

The Prince stood up.

Poonkuzhali suspected that the Prince was not delirious.

A pathetic wail was heard from afar.

The Prince was shocked.

“What is that, Poonkuzhali?”

“Nothing, Your Excellency. It’s just an owl’s hoot.”

“No, it’s a human voice. Looks like the voice of a man caught in danger. Come
let’s go and save him. Before joining the monastery let me do something good
for a fellow human being.”

The Prince started to run fast towards the voice. But he failed in his attempt and
was about to fall. Poonkuzhali held him.

Meanwhile the two men who had retrieved the boat came running. The Prince
had become unconscious. They gently carried him to the boat.

The boat started to sail in the canal. But for the Prince, others felt cramped
squeezing themselves into the small boat.

Vandhiya Thevan spoke.

“Poonkuzhali, this boat cannot carry four persons. It is time for me to take leave
of you. Let me get down here. It’s the responsibility of you two to take the

Prince safely to the planned destination. I don’t have to tell you how important is
your mission.”

His voice was choked. When the moon rays fell on his face others could see
tears glistening like pearls.

“Why don’t you get down after we cross Kodikkarai? I have kept my horse
there. Hope you remember the landmark.” – Chendhan Amudhan.

“Yes, I do remember. But let me get down right here. I’ll sleep for a while at the
Kuzhakar temple and will leave the place before dawn. Otherwise I can’t travel
tomorrow. I shudder to think of the obstacles I might have to face on the way.”

Poonkuzhali gave him a packet which she had been hiding all along.

“Take this. This is the offering from Kuzhakar temple. Eat this and then have a
nice sleep.”

“But you two have not eaten anything. You will need this more than me.”

“After the first ten miles in the canal we have a lot of villages. Either Amudhan
or I will go into those villages and gather food. Yours is a different case. You
cannot afford to be seen by anybody before you reach Pazhaiyaarai.”

“Thanks. But do not forget that the Prince is in the boat.”

“Don’t worry. The Prince is our responsibility. Nobody will notice this shaggy
boat.”

“Ok, then. Let me go.”

The wail was heard again. The Prince woke up. “WHAT’S THAT?” He asked
and soon became unconscious again.

Poonkuzhali stood up.

“No, I can’t do that. If the Prince comes to know about it he will never forgive
me. You stay in the boat for some more time. Let me try to pull the Sorcerer
from the quick sand. That place is close by.”

With these words Poonkuzhali jumped on to the shore.

“Then I’ll come with you. I can’t bear to leave you to the mercies of that
scoundrel.” – Chendan Amudhan.

“No, Amudha. You stay in the boat and take care of the Prince. I’ll go with
Poonkuzhali. I need to see the Sorcerer.”

Vandhiya Thevan ran behind Poonkuzhali.

Poonkuzhali’s mind was enacting cruel scenes for her. The Sorcerer was neckdeep in mud. The foxes were devouring him. It was a ghastly sight. In the
meanwhile the Prince was accusing her, “You are a murderess.”

The thought made her run faster. She approached the quicksand in which the
Sorcerer was caught. But he was not to be seen.

Vandhiya Thevan, who was following her, stopped in his tracks and asked her
the reason for her hesitation.

“It could be another quicksand. There are thousands of them at Kodikkarai. You
could have forgotten the exact place.”

Poonkuzhali could not even talk. She just pointed at Chendhan Amudhan’s scarf
tied to a tree.

“Do you think that he would have died here? No way. You can’t kill Ravidasan
so easily. He has a hundred lives. He would have escaped.”

Vandhiya Thevan carefully removed Amudhan’s scarf from the tree. Though he
had consoled Poonkuzhali he knew for sure that the Sorcerer could not have
survived.

‘Evil soul. He deserves this kind of a death.’

The two decided that there was no point in waiting there. They started walking
back to the canal.

The banks of the canal were covered with trees. Two figures were holding onto a
branch and were looking around. One was a man and the other a woman.

“There!..” Poonkuzhali pointed at them.

“Yes, I see. Do you know who they are?”

“One is the Sorcerer and the other, my brother’s wife. She came here before me
and has rescued him.”

“That’s good.”

“No, it’s not good. See they are looking at the boat in the canal.”

Precisely at that time one of the figures looked in their direction. Then the two
figures hid themselves in the bush.

Poonkuzhali was frightened.

“Oh My God! They have seen us!”

“Don’t talk. Come with me. Let me try a trick. I will act bizarre; don’t speak
against me. Just play along.” - Vandhiya Thevan retained his cool.

They went near the bushes where the two people were hiding. They crossed the
bush and sat near the canal. Vandhiya Thevan made sure that whatever they
talked would be heard by those hiding in the bushes.

“Look here, Poonkuzhali, why are you worried? The Sorcerer is dead and gone.
And that’s good for everyone.”

“But what a terrible death!”

“After having killed him, this kind of pity is quite surprising.”

“Oh My God! You mean to say that I killed him?”

“Then? Who lured him to the quick sand? Who trapped him there? It was only
you. Suddenly you were overcome by feelings of pity and remorse. And came
here to save him. But it is too late, Poonkuzhali. The mud has swallowed him
alive. Who knows whether you came to save him or make sure he is dead?”

“Who asked you to follow me?”

“I came to know of your heinous crime only because I followed you. You are a
ruthless killer.”

“What are you saying? Am I a killer?”

“Yes, you are. I too am a criminal, Poonkuzhali. It was I who drowned the Prince
in the sea. And you drowned the sorcerer in the quick sand. And this equals that.
So long as you don’t talk about my crime I won’t talk about yours. Is that a
deal?”

“Oh My God! So it was you! You told me a little while ago that you did not see
the Prince at all?”

“I lied. Now that I know you too are guilty of a crime, I need not hide my crime
from you. So tell me, do you accept my deal?”

“What deal?”

“That you won’t speak about my offence and I won’t speak about yours.”

“If I refuse.. “

“I’ll complain to Nandini that you killed the Sorcerer. There is no witness for my

murder. But for yours I am the eye witness.”

“So what? What can Nandini do to me?”

“Oh, not much. She will bury you neck deep and let the Royal elephant trample
you.”

“Oh My God!”

“If you don’t want that gory death then you should do what I say.”

“What do you want me to do?”

“I know your cousin is bringing a boat for you. You both should go to Lanka.
You can then cry for the Prince for the rest of your life.”

“Why should I go to Lanka?”

“So long as you are here, I run a great risk. What if you complain about me to
the Pazhuvettaraiyar? He loves the Prince. And he will try to kill me. I have
some more work to do in this bad world.”

“Rascal! Scoundrel! Traitor! Tell me this at least. Why did you kill the Prince?”

“Listen. The Prince and his sister Kunthavai conspired to snatch the crown from
Adithya Karikalan. As you know he is my boss and his enemy is my enemy.
That’s the reason I killed the Prince. Do you understand?”

“You’ll surely pay for your heinous sin.”

“That’s not your business. Tell me whether you are going to do what I asked
you.”

“I don’t think I have a choice. The boat is coming over there. Let me get into it.”

“Look here. As soon as you get into the boat you should row towards the sea. If
you try to come back to Kodikkarai, consider yourself dead. I will be standing
here till the boat reaches the sea. Understand?”

“Ok, ok. Stand here. May a hundred foxes eat you!”

Poonkuzhali noted the signal from Vandhiya Thevan. She ran to the boat and got
into it.

The boat started to move. Vandhiya Thevan was sitting there for a long time.
Half an hour later the boat had gone so far away into the canal that it was no
longer visible.

Vandhiya Thevan heard the sound of a devilish laughter. He pretended to be
startled. He stood up and looked around in all the directions.

The Sorcerer stood up and continued his devilish laugh.

“OH MY GOD! THE GHOST!”

Vandhiya Thevan ran as fast as his legs could carry him.

Chapter 9: Three In The Boat!

It was dawn. Lady Night, who was forever a black beauty, reluctantly took leave
of her beloved, Prince Earth. Her hands gently slipped away from her beloved...
She kissed him as if it were her last kiss in this life. She was reluctant to leave.

“We’ll surely meet in the evening, my dearest. After all we are going to be away
for twelve hours at the most. Be happy, my love.”

Prince Earth reassured her.

Lady Night was still hesitant. She started to move away slowly, frequently
turning around to look at her lover.

Prince Earth behaved like a paramour who did not have real love in his heart. As
soon as Lady Night got away from him the world became happy. He was even
ecstatic. Thousands of birds in the world sang the freedom song. Buds
blossomed into beautiful flowers. Beetles came in droves, flew around those
flowers singing melodious songs. Butterflies endowed with colourful wings
danced to those songs.

The Eastern sky turned gold. The tiny lamps that had lit the night skies till then
went off one by one. The crescent moon roaming in the skies asked the sun, ‘Is it
time for me to go?’

The boat was slowly moving along the canal. Poonkuzhali heard the music of the
birds and the sound of oars on water. She woke-up startled. Her eyes looked like
two blue buds that sprang from the same branch and were just about to blossom.

She saw the handsome face of the Prince before her. The Prince was still
sleeping.

Is he sleeping or is he unconscious because of his fever?

She did not know.

‘But how glowing is his face!’

Chendan Amudhan was rowing the boat.

“Why did you wake up so early? Sleep for some more time.”

Poonkuzhali smiled. And the smile was not confined to her lips. It was spread all
over hear beautiful body.

Poonkuzhali was born, bred and brought up in a forest. And yet the songs of the
birds or the drone of the beetles had never been sweeter to her.

“Athan why don’t you sing a song for me? Something in the raga suitable for
dawn.”

“Come on, girl! How can I ever open my mouth when you -the great singer - are
here? Please sing for me.”

“But didn’t you sing in the dark forest last night?”

“That was for a purpose.”

“I too want to sing. But I don’t want to disturb the Prince.”

“That’s not a disturbance for me. You two sing together. “The Prince had woken
up.

Poonkuzhali became so shy that she hung down her head.

“Where is the boat going?” – It was the Prince again.

“To Choodamani Monastery at Nagapattinam.”

“So that means whatever I saw and heard last night is not a dream. They are all
real.”

“Yes, Your Excellency. This man here brought the message from your sister, the
Princess.”

“Amudha, what did the Princess tell you? Did she want me to join the
monastery?”

Amudhan did not know how to answer that question. They heard the sound of
horse steps. Amudhan and Poonkuzhali were shocked.

The Prince did not show any feelings.

“Where is my friend, the warrior from the Vaana clan?” – The Prince shouted
and then fell unconscious again.

A little later Vandhiya Thevan appeared on a horseback. The boat stopped.
Vandhiya Thevan jumped down from the horse.

“Don’t worry. Nothing important. Just wanted to check on you. You have
crossed all the dangers. You’ll be safe.”

“The Sorcerer?” Poonkuzhali asked in a worried voice.

“He believed my words. He did not even suspect that the Prince was in this

boat.”

“Did you see him?”

“I did. But I pretended as if I had seen a ghost.”

“I have never seen a worse liar than you.”

“Lie is a bad word. It’s my imagination. My creativity! How is the Prince
doing?”

“He wakes up once in a while, speaks and then becomes unconscious.”

“Symptoms of this type of fever.”

“How long will it last?”

“Sometimes even for a month. Take him to Choodamani Monastery. The monks
there can cure him in two weeks. Be careful, Poonkuzhali. I have entrusted the
Prince to your personal care. I don’t even trust your cousin that much. The
moment he sees a temple he will forget everything, sing some devotional songs
and go to have a dharshan of the Lord.”

“I don’t do such things after knowing you. I have lost interest in serving the
Lord.” – Amudhan spoke for the first time.

“Is it because of me or this beautiful girl? Tell me the truth.”

Chendan Amudhan pretended not to have heard Vandhiya Thevan.

“Did you find the horse in the place I told you?”

“Actually it was the horse which found me. Is that the horse I left with you at
Thanjavur?”

“Yes, it is.”

“It saw me in the dark forest and neighed. I learnt one useful thing from the
Arabs. Amudha, it is cruel to make the horse run on its bare feet. You should fix
a horseshoe on its hoofs. I am going to do that when I come across the first black
smith on the way. Ok, I don’t have the time to talk about all those things!

“I don’t know whether I will meet you or your Prince in future. If the Prince
wakes up tell him that I am going to Pazhaiyaarai. And that I’ll send a message
to him from there. Otherwise he will be worried...”

Vandhiya Thevan turned the horse and sped away.

The boat was passing through the narrow canal which had thick bushes on both
the sides. Most of them were screw-pine bushes. There were golden and white
screw-pine flowers on both the sides. The fragrance from the flowers made one
dizzy. At some places there were the Punnai trees. And in some places there
were the Kadamba trees. The banks of the canal were littered with the pearly
Punnai flowers and the blood-red Kadamba flowers.

If at all there was a direct route from earth to heaven to the good and righteous
that would be exactly like this one, thought Poonkuzhali.

When they found a village on the way Chendan Amudhan went to gather food
for Poonkuzhali and milk for the Prince.

Whenever the Prince woke up Poonkuzhali moved a little away from him. She
could not see straight into his eyes and always averted his glance.

When the Prince was unconscious she was constantly looking at his beautiful
face. She talked about so many things with Amudhan. Sometimes they sang
together.

When Amudhan went out to fetch food, Poonkuzhali would gently rub her hands
on the Prince’s forehead or ruffle his hair. In those moments she would reach the
heights of ecstasy.

She was sure that she had been serving the Prince in that manner for so many
lifetimes in the past. Thousands of formless thoughts fluttered their wings as

they entered her heart, stayed there for some time and then flew away.

The travel continued for a night and a day. Poonkuzhali and Amudhan took turns
in rowing the boat. They also slept in turns. When Poonkuzhali slept she had
sweet dreams.

On the dawn of the next day when the whole world was glowing in the golden
rays of the sun the boat reached the shores of Nagapattinam. A canal that
branched from the main canal led them directly to the Choodamani Monastery.

They parked the boat on the rear side of the monastery.

The famous Choodamani Monastery, it appeared, was in chaos. A huge crowd
was gathered outside the monastery. They were shouting. The monks were
running here and there.

The three alighted from the boat.

Chendan Amudhan spoke.

“Please wait here. Let me go there first to find out what’s happening.”

Chapter 10: The Choodamani Monastery

The port town of Poompuhar, famously known as Kaveripoompattinam in the
historical past, was engulfed by the sea long back. Then Nagapattinam became
an important seaport for the Chozha Empire. The Chozha Kingdom was rich in
many resources thanks to River Cauvery. Many foreign countries were interested
in having trade-relationships with the Chozha Empire. Huge ships loaded with
commodities of trade touched Nagapattinam port every day. The ships had
pearls, diamonds, and perfumes. There were also ships carrying pedigree
Arabian horses.

In the days of Saint Sundaramurthy, the port town had tall mansions with
beautiful balconies, which he immortalized in his poetry. In fact, the Saint, often
considered as the Lord’s friend, prayed for gold, gems, dresses, jewels and while
in Nagapattinam also prayed for some pedigree horses and got them too. Then he
went back to Thiruvarur, as the legend goes.

Perhaps on seeing the Arab horses being unloaded from the foreign ships the
saint must have developed a desire to ride on them!

Nagapattinam finds a reference not only in mythological texts but in the
historical edicts as well.

The Copper Plates found in Anaimangalam describes the port town in the
following words:

“Nagapattinam has many temples, choultries, water bodies and gardens. Its

streets are full of high- rise buildings with beautiful balconies.”

The same copper plates describe the history of the Choodamani Buddhist
Monastery, which was very popular in those days.

The present day Malaysia was known as Srivijaya in those days. One of the
important cities in that country was Kadaram. The Sailendra Dynasty ruled the
vast Srivijaya country with their capital at Kadaram. One of the famous kings of
the dynasty was Choodamanivarman.

The copper plates of Anaimangalam sing praises of Choodamanivarman: “An
expert in politics; as wise as the Guru of gods, Sri Brahaspathi himself. He was
like a sun to the intellectual lotuses of his country and was like the all-giving
celestial Karpaka Vriksha to those who sought his help.”

The son of that king, one Maravijayothunga Varman, built the Choodamani
Monastery “which in its stature resembled the famous Meru Mountain” in
honour of his father, Choodamani Varman. This reference too is found in those
copper plates.

Why should the king of Kadaram travel several thousand miles across the sea to
build a monastery in Nagapattinam? Srivijaya had a long-standing trade
relationship with the Chozhas. Many citizens of Srivijaya had migrated to
Nagapattinam to look after the foreign trade. Many visited the port town quite
often.

The King of Kadaram and his citizens were Buddhists. The King thought that
having a monastery of that size and stature in Nagapattinam would cater to the

religious needs of his citizens living in that town. He might have also wanted to
build a monument for a religion in its country of birth.

The Kings who ruled over Tamilnadu always believed in religious harmony.
They readily gave permission for building the monastery in Tamilnadu. They did
not stop with that; but also gave many endowments and gifted tax-free lands to
the monastery. Prince Arulmozhivarman, later known as Rajaraja Chozhan,
gifted Anaimangalam and the surrounding villages to the monastery tax-free.
The monastery owned all the lands and collected land revenue from the users.
This gift was confirmed by Rajaraja Chozhan’s son, Rajendra Chozhan in the
edicts created by him. In fact, this reconfirmation came to be popularly known as
Anaimangalam Copper Plates. Twenty-one copper plates have been found. Each
plate is 14 inches long and 5 inches wide. The plates are held together in a
copper ring. The copper plates were then taken to the town Leiden in
Netherlands and were exhibited there. Hence, some historians refer to these
plates as Leiden Edicts.

From the days of Vijayaalaya Chozhan, the Chozha Kings had been great
devotees of Lord Shiva. Adithya Chozha, Emperor Paranthaka and
Kandaraathithar were ardent Saivites. They supported the Shiva Temples in the
Empire. However, they did not hate the other religions. Their subjects were free
to profess any religion and these broad-minded Kings supported all such
religions.

Sundara Chozhan went one-step ahead of his ancestors. He extended special
privileges to the Buddhist Monasteries in the state. That made the Buddhists
living in the Empire at that time enthusiastic supporters of the Emperor. And
when they heard that the Prince fighting in Srilanka had ordered the renovation
of the Buddhist Monasteries destroyed by war, their joy knew no bounds.

But what caused the panic in the famous Choodamani Monastery on that fateful
day? Why were the monks running restlessly? Why was there so much noise and

confusion at the gates of the monastery?

Chendan Amudhan reached the entrance of the monastery. It was there one could
find the Buddha Temple where people used to come to worship every day. The
temple was called ‘‘Chaitya’.

It was morning time. There were many devotees in the temple. They were
carrying lotus and Shenbaga flowers in plates. It appeared as if they had
forgotten the purpose of their visit. There were many monks on the steps to the
temple.

Chendan Amudhan saw a person talking to the monks. On hearing, his words the
monks were shedding tears of grief. Normally the devotees in a Buddhist Temple
used to shout ‘Sadhu’ ‘Sadhu’. Instead they were all exclaiming, “Aiyoo” “Oh
My God” “NO”!

Amudhan went near the person talking to the monks. He was one of the sailors
in Parthibendran’s ship. The ship had reached Nagapattinam the previous night.
As soon as the sailors reached the shore, they spread the news that Prince
Arulmozhivarman was drowned in the sea. The news spread like wild fire.

The Principal Monk of the Choodamani Monastery was shocked. He sent word
to one of the sailors of Parthibendran’s ship who had come there. He told them
what he saw with his own eyes.

“The Prince jumped into the sea when there was a whirlwind. And he never
came back.”

The people who heard the news broke into violent sobs. Even the Principal
Monk who had renounced the joys and sorrows of worldly life could not hold
back his tears. Hanging his head down, tears continuously flowing from his eyes,
he ran up the steps, went past the temple and reached the monastery. Other
monks followed him. They did not notice Chendan Amudhan coming along with
them.

The Principal Monk spoke to others in a choked voice.

“Is this the way Lord Buddha should love us? How many castles I have built in
my dream! All of them are shattered today.

“Do you know that I had been to Thanjavur recently to see the Emperor? I spoke
to him about the great deeds of his son Arulmozhivarman in Srilanka. Princess
Kunthavai too heard my words. Then she took me aside and told me about the
need to create a nursing home near our monastery. She also promised to give
grants for the purpose. Not only that, she even told me,

‘Acharya, you might have heard of so many strange things happening in the
country. It may so happen that the Prince might stay as a guest in your monastery
for a few days. Will you be able to take care of him?’

‘Your Excellency, if only we are blessed with such a privilege we’ll guard the
Prince as the eye-lids guard our eyes.’

But what’s the use? The Prince is dead. The dreams of all the good people in the

Empire have been laid to ruins. The Chozha Empire is drowned. How did the
Samudraraja have the heart to inflict that kind of cruelty on us? Is there no one to
question that villain?”

The other monks were crying silently. Nobody spoke for a while.

Chendan Amudhan thought that it was the right time to approach the Principal
Monk. But when he tried, the other monks blocked him.

‘Who is he? And how did he manage to come in?’ – They asked one another.

“Oh Holy Ones, my name is Chendan Amudhan. I come from Thanjavur. I have
a message for your Principal Monk.”

“What is the message?” – They asked him in chorus.

The Acharya saw the hesitation on his face.

“There is nothing that these people should not know. You can deliver the
message to me in their presence.”

Amudhan was cautious.

“Acharya, I’ve brought a sick man.”

“Who is that? What disease? Where is the patient?”

“I’ve left the patient in the centre yard of the monastery.”

“But how did you reach there?”

“Through the canal. I brought the patient in a boat. It is fever. He is shivering
and delirious. You should immediately... “

“Oh My God! That is a highly contagious disease. Why did you bring the patient
here? And that too at this time?”

“Acharya, I thought that Emperor Asoka belonged to your religion. Now I know
it is wrong.”

“Why do you say that?”

“I saw an Asoka Pillar near Kanchi. There it is written that the first duty of a true
Buddhist is to take care of the sick. But you seem to drive me away.”

The Acharya now got the message loud and clear.

He now spoke to the other monks.

“You please wait here. I’ll go with him and have a look at the patient.”

He turned to Amudhan.

“Come, let’s go. Fast!”

In the centre yard of the monastery that was near the canal, there was a young
man and a woman.

“Oh My God! See what you have done! Women cannot enter this monastery. We
have a separate block for Buddhist nuns.”

When the Acharya went near the patient and saw his face, he was shocked. He
was paralysed for a few minutes.

Finally, he composed himself and spoke to Amudhan to reconfirm his findings.

“Prince Arulmozhivarman?”

The Prince heard the Acharya and spoke as if he were in a hurry.

“No, Acharya. I am not the Prince. This man and this girl are trying to drive me
crazy. I am just a boatman. Only a few minutes ago I proposed to this girl. I told
her, ‘Oh girl, will you please marry me? We’ll go to far off countries in this
boat.’ She said something, which I could not understand. She is talking nonsense, Acharya. She says that I am born to rule the world. Therefore, this poor
girl refuses to marry me. She says it is enough if I am happy. She will be content
to listen to my tales of victory with pride in future. See how things are! Now tell
me, Acharya, who is crazy? Me or this girl?”

Chendan Amudhan whispered something into the ears of the Acharya. Even
before that, the monk had guessed that the Prince was delirious. He remembered
the words of Princess Kunthavai, seeking refuge for the Prince in the monastery.

He now roared to the other monks who had come there.

“This man has a kind of viral fever. We cannot let him out now as he might
spread the disease to thousands of people and we will have a full-blown
epidemic in the town. We know very well that thousands of people died in Lanka
because of this fever. Therefore, I am going to take this young man to my room
and serve him personally. The patient might slip into a state of delirium quite
often. So don’t pay heed to whatever he says when he is delirious. Am I clear?”

The Acharya did not wait for the others’ consent. He approached the Prince and
lifted him up supporting him on one side. Amudhan supported the other side.
They climbed up the steps of the monastery.

‘In a few seconds they will climb the steps. They will open the door and go in.
The door will then be closed. Forever! I will not be able to see the Prince again.’

Poonkuzhali felt a lump in her throat as her mind was lost in these thoughts.

And whatever she thought happened. As soon as they climbed the stairs, the
door opened. Chendan Amudhan was stopped at the door. The Acharya spoke
something to him. Then they went in.

The door was closed with a bang. It appeared as if the doors to her heart were
closed.

‘I may not see the Prince again in this life time. But will I be lucky enough to see
him in my next birth?’

Poonkuzhali stood like a statue. She saw the Prince disappearing behind the
doors.

Chapter 11: The Blacksmith

Vandhiya Thevan goaded his horse to run fast. He was galloping fast towards
Pazhaiyaarai. He remembered the route he took when he travelled from
Pazhaiyaarai to Kodikkarai. So he did not stop to ask for directions. For the first
few miles he was travelling through the forest. The horse was exhausted.
Vandhiya Thevan too became tired.

It had been long since he had a good sleep. Whatever little sleep he had was
what he managed while he was on a horseback or on a boat ride. He never had
any proper sleep on a good bed. And once he met Princess Kunthavai and
delivered the message to her, he would have discharged his responsibilities.
After that he could sleep peacefully without any care in the world. Vandhiya
Thevan planned to sleep for days on end to compensate for his sleep-deprivation.
Then he imagined the happiness he would have when he told the Princess, “Your
Excellency, I have completed the task you entrusted to me.” And in response
how her face would blossom into a beautiful smile. Vandhiya Thevan became
ecstatic.

He remembered something else too. Ever since he had left Kanchi he had been
lying and bluffing. Of course they were all necessary under the circumstances.
And yet when he thought about them he felt ashamed.

After he got to know the Prince Arulmozhivarman in person, his attitude towards
life had drastically changed. He had been thinking till then that those involved in
politics had to be well-versed in Machiavellian scheming and trickery. He even
thought that, such scheming would help him win back his country lost by his
forefathers.

But everything changed after he got to know the Prince. He was bowled over by
the Prince’s honesty and his love for truth. And now he hated to lie. He did not
want to build up false stories to gain advantage over his unsuspecting enemies.

He remembered the blatant lie uttered to the Sorcerer in the pretext of saving the
Prince. He now prayed that it should not complicate things further.

What if somebody had overheard that? What if that somebody passed on the
information to Kunthavai herself! Of course Kunthavai will not believe that. Still
it’s disastrous.

No, from now on I am not going to lie. I am going to tell only the truth. And face
the consequences, however unpleasant they may be. Let that Vaishnavite Fanatic
and the Sorcerer indulge in trickery and deceit. Why should I? Let my victories
come through my sword. That is enough for me. Even if I were to lose my life for
the sake of truth I won’t mind. I am going to quit the world of lies, trickery and
scheming forever.

He did not notice his horse slowing down as he was absorbed in his thoughts. In
fact he had even dozed off to sleep. When the horse staggered he woke up with a
start. The horse could not place one of its forelegs on the ground anymore. The
beast was in pain. He jumped down. He gently patted the horse and examined
the affected leg. He found a small, sharp stone stuck to the hoof. He carefully
pulled it out. Thank God, the horse was not hurt. He patted the horse again and
climbed on it. He remembered the conversation with the Arabs on the ship.

“Your people are cruel. You don’t even have the basic sense of protecting the
horse’s hoofs. You make the animal run barefoot. How long do you think those
horses will live?”

These words were ringing in his ears as he was riding his horse.

When the soldiers went to warfront they always wore a shield to protect their
chest. But to have a shield for the hoofs of the horse sounded quite strange to
him.

But he had heard that this was done in other countries. He wanted to enquire
about that practice with the first blacksmith on the way. And if possible he
wanted to make a shield for the hoofs of his horse. Otherwise it would be very
difficult for him to reach Pazhaiyaarai. If the horse fell on the way, he would not
be able to get another. The only option left to him then would be to steal a horse.
No, no, not at all! Even the mere thought of stealing made him feel ashamed.

Vandhiya Thevan had swerved from the forest-path mostly on a guess. He had
reached the Royal Highway. He decided to travel on the highway unmindful of
the consequences. Nobody knew him in that place. Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men
would cross this way only later. Even the Sorcerer would come later. So there
was no obvious danger on the way. And if only he could locate a blacksmith on
the highway and fix a shield for the hoofs of his horse!

He passed through a village. The village was in buzzing with activity. Festoons
adorned the streets and the houses on the one side of the road. Perhaps they were
expecting the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar to pass through this way and the
decorations were done in his honour. He was sure that he would be far away
from the village before Pazhuvettaraiyar’s retinue reached there.

On the other side of the road people were standing in groups and talking about
something quite serious. There were men, women, old people and even children.

He could not guess what they were talking about. As soon as they saw somebody
on a horse they wanted to stop him and know about the developments. But
Vandhiya Thevan did not stop or slow-down. He just rode past the people. He
did not want to be caught in any complications.

At the outskirts of the village he saw a smithy. He parked the horse at the gate
and went in.

He saw a man working on an iron. A small boy was blowing air into the furnace.
Vandhiya Thevan thought there was somebody else in the back who vanished on
seeing him. But he was not distracted by that. He was attracted by the sword in
the hands of the black smith. That was a rare piece. The blacksmith was busy
repairing that sword. A part of the sword was glowing in white like a piece of
silver while the other part was glowing in yellow like gold. The sword had just
been taken off the furnace; the red hot iron glowed like gold.

“Now this is a real sword.”

Vandhiya Thevan was lost in admiration.

Chapter 12: “Throw Him Into The Fire!”

The blacksmith was so absorbed in his work that he did not notice Vandhiya
Thevan standing before him. Vandhiya Thevan had to clear his throat noisily
several times to attract his attention.

“Who are you, man? What do you want? Interested in swords or spears? The
weapons have lost their value these days. I don’t think you would have come for
a new sword.”

“I am surprised by your words. You are working on a sword. And yet you say
there is no use for swords these days.”

“This is something very rare. They have brought an old sword for repair. A few
years ago when we had the Pandya wars and the North Pennai War you could see
heaps of swords in my workshop. Even when the Lankan war started there was
some demand for swords and spears. But now nobody wants them. People now
come to me to sell their old weapons. Perhaps you too have come for that.”

“No. I might need my sword till my work is over Then I will carry a drum and
go on a pilgrimage singing devotional songs. Perhaps then I’ll give my weapons
to you.”

“Then what made you come here now?”

“I’ve been riding on my horse for quite some time. I have to take the horse on a
rough terrain. And I have a long way to go. I heard somewhere about the iron
shield being affixed to the hoofs of a horse. Can you do it for me?”

“Yes. That’s the usual practice is the country of Arabia. Some people have
started the practice here as well. I have some experience in that kind of work.”

“Will you please do it for my horse?”

“I will. But it may take some time. I have to first finish the work at hand before
starting your work.”

Vandhiya was tired. His horse was exhausted. He decided to wait till the
blacksmith was free. He did not want to resume his journey without first giving a
protection to his horse’s hoofs.

“I’ll wait provided you promise me to take up my work next.”

“Sure.”

Vandhiya Thevan was looking at the red hot sword at the hand of the blacksmith.

“Oh My God! What an excellent craftsmanship! I am sure this sword belongs to
a member of a royal family. Whose is this?”

“Young man, the famous Harischandra River runs near this place. And I need not
tell you that King Harischandra never uttered a lie in his life.”

“I know about the King. I have heard about the river. So what?”

“I take bath in that river frequently.”

“That’s a good thing. You’ll be accumulating loads of merit for your journey into
the other world.”

“I have a policy. Don’t tell a lie; always tell the truth, of course to the extent it is
possible.”

“Good policy! Who objected to that? Who asked you to lie? I never did.”

“Please don’t ask about this sword. Please don’t make me lie.”

‘Now I understand.’ - Vandhiya Thevan did not express his thought.

“Agreed. I won’t ask you anything. And you don’t have to swerve from your
policy. I only request you to attend to my work as quickly as possible.”

Silence prevailed. The blacksmith started focussing on his work.

Vandhiya Thevan was still looking at the sword. He saw the figure of a fish
engraved on the sword’s handle. He was surprised. Why a fish? Was it merely
ornamental? Or was there any significance to it?

The blacksmith placed the part of the handle that contained the figure of the fish
in fire and then hammered it hard. Vandhiya Thevan guessed that the blacksmith
was trying hard to hide the fish.

‘But why should he do that?’

As Vandhiya Thevan was thinking about the sword and the fish, he felt very
sleepy. The Goddess of Sleep, who had been kept away by him, now came back
to him with a vengeance. When she cast her magic net strongly over him, there
was no possibility of escape. He was dozing off to sleep even while sitting near
the blacksmith. Then he lay down near the furnace and lapsed into a sound sleep.

Vandhiya Thevan had many horrible dreams. And one was about the sword he
saw before falling asleep.

In his dream he saw a person who claimed the beautiful sword. The blacksmith
returned it to him.

“How much do I owe you?”

“Nothing. Let this work be my offering to the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur,
Nandini Devi.”

“Be careful. Don’t let anybody know about this. And never tell the name of the
Junior Queen. If you did.. .. .”

“Why should I tell her name? Rest assured I won’t.”

“Some young man is sleeping over there. And you are talking aloud.”

“He’s in deep sleep. He can’t even hear a thunderstorm or feel an earth quake.”

“If you find that he knows about this transaction, then throw him into this fire
and finish him off. Don’t take any chances.”

At the end of this conversation the blacksmith and the other person dragged
Vandhiya Thevan and was about to dump him into the fire. And then the scene
changed in his dream.

The messengers of Death took him to hell. The Lord of Death inquired about his
activities on earth.

The Lord’s Accountant, Chitragupta, answered while examining the palm leaves
in his hand:

“Lord, this man is an expert in telling lies. Tried hard as we did, we could not
keep count of the number of lies he uttered during his lifetime.

“NO, NO! “ Vandhiya Thevan denied the charge in a hurry.

“I told those lies only while serving the Chozha Emperor’s family. And that was
part of my duties. I had to tell them in order to complete the tasks entrusted to
me.”

“A lie is a lie, whatever may be the reason for uttering it. Throw him into the
largest fire-pit in hell. Let his soul be roasted.”

A hundred thousand voices applauded the sentence from inside the hell.

The messengers of Death took him away. They made preparations to push him
into a huge pit of fire.

Vandhiya Thevan saw the faces of the two messengers. They strongly resembled
the faces of the Pazhuvettaraiyar Brothers. He was shocked.

Princess Kunthavai walked into the scene.

“He lied only to carry out my orders. I am the one to be punished. Set him free

and throw me into the fire.”

Nandini too walked in.

“Let’s not take any chances. Burn them both.”

The messengers of Death were about to push Vandhiya Thevan and Kunthavai.

“NO. NO. DON’T DO THAT!”

Vandhiya Thevan screamed. He woke up. He sat up. It was a great relief for him
to know that it was a mere dream. But while it happened it appeared so vivid that
the thought it was real. He was still shaking in fear.

‘Enough is enough. I won’t lie for any reason whatsoever.’ Vandhiya Thevan
swore to himself.

"Have I slept for a long time?” Vandhiya Thevan asked the blacksmith.

“Not much. Just for six hours. I think you hail from the clan of the demon king
Kumbakarna, who is noted for his continuous sleeping. You sleep like a log in
the day time. I was just wondering how you will be sleeping in the night.”

“Oh My God! Did I sleep for six hours? Ok, I need to go. Have you finished my
work?”

“Have to start it now. But what difference will it make to somebody as sleepy as
you? If you are going to sleep like this you’ll lose your horse. You’ll lose
yourself.”

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked. He ran outside to check on his horse. It was not
there.

“WHERE IS MY HORSE?” Vandhiya Thevan shouted. His hand was on his
knife.

“Don’t panic. Your horse is safe in the back yard.”

Vandhiya Thevan ran up to the back yard. His horse was standing inside a
thatched shed closed on three sides. The small boy who was blowing air into the
furnace was feeding the horse. When the horse saw its master its body shook and
it neighed in happiness.

“Please hold your horse, while I measure its hoofs.”

Vandhiya Thevan went near the horse and lovingly patted on its back. The boy
was measuring the hoofs.

“Who brought the horse here?”

“Me.”

“Why?”

“My father asked me to do it.”

“What for?”

“A little while ago the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and his retinue passed through
this place. If his men had seen the horse they would have simply taken it with
them.”

Vandhiya Thevan remembered what happened in Veeranarayanapuram. He was
ashamed. And his heart was brimming with gratitude towards the blacksmith and
his son. As soon as the boy was done with his job they both returned to the
workshop.

The blacksmith took a piece of iron and began to shape it like the hoof of a
horse.

“Thanks for saving my horse.”

“My customers’ belongings are my responsibility. I just did my duty.”

“When did Pazhuvettaraiyar’s retinue cross this place?”

“About an hour ago. They were making a huge noise. Even that could not wake
you up from your sleep. I was surprised.”

“Agreed, I slept. But you have wasted my time. You could have started the work
soon after the other customer left.”

“Yes, I could have. But having listened to the news they brought me I was in no
mood to work. It’s only for your sake that I am controlling myself and doing the
work. Where are you coming from?”

Vandhiya Thevan started guessing about that ‘disturbing news.’

“I am coming from Lanka.”

The blacksmith threw a pointed glance at his face. Then he lowered his voice.

“Did you see Prince Arulmozhivarman when you were in Lanka?”

Vandhiya Thevan remembered his vow – to speak the truth and only the truth.

“I did.”

“When did you see him last?”

“This morning.”

The blacksmith was furious.

“Are you kidding?”

“No. I am telling the truth.”

“Perhaps you might even tell where the Prince is right now.”

“Yes. If you ask me I’ll have to tell.”

“Come on tell me. Where is he now?”

“At Choodamani Buddhist Monastery, Nagapattinam.”

“Young man, I have seen many liars in my life time. But have never seen such a
hardened liar blessed with such a fertile imagination.”

Vandhiya Thevan smiled to himself.

The world is eager to buy all my lies. But when I speak the truth no one is ready
to believe me. Perhaps my stars are to be blamed.

"When did you leave Srilanka?”

“Four days ago.”

“That’s the reason you don’t know this news.”

“What news?”

“Our Prince, the one and only Ponniyin Selvan is dead. Drowned in the sea.”

Vandhiya Thevan strained himself to show a shocking expression on his face.

“Oh My God! Who told you?”

“People have been talking since last night. When Pazhuvettaraiyar crossed this
way the leaders of our village asked him. He confirmed the news. I am
wondering why lightning has not yet struck that evil fellow!”

“Why are you cursing a poor old man?”

“He is the culprit. People say that he was the one who killed the Prince. They
even cancelled the grand reception planned for him earlier.”

“Do your people love the Prince so much?”

“Do I have to explain? Listen, the whole village is in tears now. Not just this
village, the whole of Chozha Empire is crying. They are heaping curses on the
Pazhuvettaraiyars. The Emperor is already sick. I don’t know what will happen
to him if he comes to know of his son’s death. I shudder to think of calamities
that are going to happen. A comet has been sighted in the sky these days. Some
catastrophe is bound to happen.”

Vandhiya Thevan visualized the consequences. In a way it was better that the
blacksmith did not believe him when he told that the Prince was in Choodamani
monastery.

Well, I am not going to lie. Nor am I going to reveal the truth to this fellow.
Princess Kunthavai must have her own reasons in making the Prince stay at the
monastery. Let me meet her first and then act as she tells me.

“You seem to be lost in thoughts.” – The blacksmith.

“I was caught in the mid sea at the time of whirlwind. I was saved because of
God’s grace.”

“Is there a thing called God’s grace?”

“What makes you say that?”

“If there is a God and he has grace, can these Pazhuvettaraiyars continue with
their atrocities? If there’s God’s grace will our dear Ponniyin Selvan die?”

“Pazhuvettaraiyars are in power today. You should not talk like this. If somebody
hears, you’ll be in serious trouble. Please be careful.”

“You’ll have to be more careful than me. At least I talk when I am awake. You
talk in your sleep.”

“Oh My God! Did I? What did I blabber?”

“You said that the Pazhuvettaraiyars are messengers of Death. You called the
Junior Queen, a witch. Whatever you said was true. But if anybody else had
heard that, what would have happened to you? And precisely when you were
describing Pazhuvettaraiyars as messengers of Death, their retinue crossed this
way. You know for a moment, I was in a state of shock.”

“What did you do then?”

“I went to the entrance closing the door behind me. And even before that your
horse was safely taken to the back yard.”

“Did I say anything else?”

“You said a lot.. “

“Oh My God!”

“You said that you forced the Prince to go to Pazhaiyaarai. But he insisted on
surrendering to Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men. You said so many things. You also said
something about Princess Kunthavai. You will have to be careful, Young Man.”

Vandhiya Thevan was ashamed. Did he say anything improper about the
Princess? He was shocked. He vowed that in future he would sleep only in a
closed room and that too alone. Or else he would sleep in a forest or a desert or a
cave, far from the human habitat.

“How were you caught in the whirlwind? And how were you saved?”

“My ship was hit by the lightning and it sank. I was holding on to the broken

sails when a fisherwoman took me in her boat and brought me ashore.”

“Perhaps the Prince also might have escaped as you did.”

“If that’s God’s will, yes, he would have escaped.”

“Where did you stay yesterday?”

“At Kodikkarai. Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men were all over the town. So I slept in the
Kuzhakar temple and left the place while it was still dark.”

“That’s the reason you have not heard the news about the Prince.”

“Thanks for sharing that with me. I have to rush to Pazhaiyaarai. I don’t want to
be caught with the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s retinue. How should I go?”

“Pazhuvettaraiyar is going through the Royal Highway to Thanjavur. So you can
ride along the banks of Mullai River. You can reach Pazhaiyaarai early.”

“Thanks. I’ll be thankful if you can do the work a little faster.”

“Here you go.”

The blacksmith started to hammer the curved iron. And he vented out his anger
on those in power when he hit the iron.

“This blow is for the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. And this, for the Junior. This is for
Sambuvaraiyar. And this, for Mazhavaraiyar.” Every blow fell on the iron with
great force. Vandhiya Thevan understood how the common man hated the
Chieftains and those in power.

As soon as the work was over and the hoofs of the horse were shielded Vandhiya
Thevan attempted to pay the blacksmith. But the blacksmith refused to accept.

“I didn’t do that for money. I did the work because you seem to be a good man.”

Vandhiya Thevan thanked the blacksmith again before taking leave of him.

As he was about to leave, the blacksmith asked:

“What business do you have in Pazhaiyaarai?”

“Ask no questions; you’ll hear no lies.”

The blacksmith laughed.

“You are becoming smart. Keep it up. And be careful even while sleeping. Have
a safe journey!”

When Vandhiya Thevan resumed his journey, the sun was preparing to set in the
west. The light faded quickly and darkness enveloped him. But before it was
dark he had reached the banks of River Mullai. There was no need to ask for
directions any more. He had to just ride along the banks of the river till he
reached his destination.

The night was quite young. The sky was soon lit with a million stars. There were
not many trees along the river bank. Only small bushes were found. The stars
were good enough to illuminate the way.

A host of fire-flies were competing with the stars. Vandhiya Thevan’s mind was
filled with enthusiasm. And there were several reasons for that.

While the whole country was mourning the loss of the Prince, he was the only
one who knew that the Prince was safe. He was simply overwhelmed by the
affection the people had for their dear Prince. He was quite happy that he could
deceive the Sorcerer Ravidasan once again. And to cap it all the thought that he
was going to see Kunthavai again made him quite excited.

And that would be no ordinary meeting. He was going to meet her to proclaim
that he has successfully completed the assignment she personally gave him. He
thought of all the obstacles he had to meet on the way. And he was proud that
somehow he could overcome them all and succeed in his mission.

‘By this time tomorrow evening I will meet the Princess’

When he thought of the meeting, he became quite ecstatic.

The cloudless sky illuminated by the stars, the earth covered with the faint light
of the fire flies hovering over the bushes, the rustling sound caused by the flow
of the river, the cool breeze that hugged his body - all these made him very
happy. The earth and the sky were covered in happiness. He remembered an old
love-song. There was no human being around. Even the birds had retired into
their nests for the day. There was no one to object to his singing. It was not
difficult to guess who was in his mind when he sang the song.

The lights of the sky
After seeing you
Have become excited
And are frozen there.
What’s your voice made of?
Honey or the breeze?
When I see your eyes
Which resemble fish
Why am I so ecstatic?

The moment he finished the song he could hear the foxes howling as if in
retaliation. And he also heard a man laughing aloud.

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked. His hand instinctively reached for his knife.

A figure came out of the dark shadows of a Punnai tree.

“Marvellous! You sing really well. And the howling of the foxes is even better.”

It was Devaralan, the one who in a possessed state predicted calamity for the
Chozha Empire long ago at the Kadambur Palace.

Chapter 13: The Poisoned Arrow

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked to see Devaralan in that forest. He remembered
the way Devaralan danced at the Kadambur Palace - as if he were possessed by
evil spirits. He vividly remembered the ominous predictions that came from him.
Vandhiya Thevan also remembered the conversation Ravidasan and Devaralan
had in the ship.

It was difficult to tell whether they spoke the truth. Yet, Vandhiya Thevan was
sure that they were involved in some dangerous conspiracy. Vandhiya Thevan
hated his fate for being confronted by one of those evil men in this godforsaken
place devoid of any human habitation.

He looked around. He could see a burning fire at a distance. The place was a
cremation ground.

‘Some dead body is being consigned to flames there. A life has ended. And when
the person was alive how would he have been tossed around by his desires?

What kind of pains and pleasures he would have gone through in life? In less
than thirty minutes, nothing will remain of that man but for a handful of ashes.

All the glory, all the running around, the pains, the pleasures, the insults and the
achievements reduced to a mere handful of ashes.

And that’s the destiny of every one born in this world, be he an Emperor or a
poor beggar.’

These thoughts drove away his fear.

Why should I try to run away from this double-crosser? Perhaps he wants to say
something to me. Let me hear him. Probably he is the one who hid himself when
he saw me at the blacksmith’s.

Who knows, he may be the owner of that beautiful sword which the blacksmith
was working on when I was there.

Yes, there was the figure of a fish in the handle. (Fish is the symbol of the
Pandyas). Therefore, if I can get him to talk I may get to know something new.

Vandhiya Thevan slowed down. The horse had just been fitted with a horseshoe
and it could not run fast. He did not have the heart to flog the horse.

“Hey, how did you jump out of nowhere?”

“I should ask that question. Didn’t we leave you mid sea, bound to the sails of a
sinking ship?”

“Yes, you did. Sorcery is not your exclusive privilege. I too know something.”

“I’m happy to know that you have started believing in sorcery. By my magical
powers I found out that you’d be going alone in this forest path. That’s why I
came here before you could and was waiting for you.”

“You? Waiting for me? What for?”

“Why don’t you find it yourself with your powers of magic?”

“I know. You shared your secrets with me when we were in the sea. I don’t know
how far they are true. Whatever it is, I have decided to forget them all. I won’t
reveal them to anybody.”

“I am not worried about that. The moment you think of sharing those secrets
with somebody your tongue will be cut into two pieces and you’ll become
dumb.”

Vandhiya Thevan shivered. He remembered the dumb women he met in
Thanjavur and in Srilanka. He rode on slowly for a while.

‘Why this crook is following me? How can I get away from him? If only there are
quick sands here in this place as they are in Kodikkarai... Or can I push him in
to the river? Well, there is no use doing it. For starters, there is not enough
water in the river.

If there is no other way then I’ll have to use my sword.

“Thambi I know what you think. But that’s impossible. Don’t ever think of it.”

Vandhiya Thevan wanted to switch the topic.

After all, he needed some time to plan his escape routes. Till then he should
engage him in a conversation.

“What happened to your partner, Ravidasan?”

Devaralan laughed as if he had heard the funniest line ever spoken.

“You should know. Where is he?”

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked. He should not have touched that subject. This
man should have met Ravidasan.

Is he testing me now?

“Why are you silent? Won’t you tell me where my friend Ravidasan is? Ok, let it
go. Tell me this at least. Where is that boat-girl Poonkuzhali?”

Vandhiya Thevan shivered in fear as if he had just stepped on a snake. He was
hesitant to proceed with the conversation.

“You won’t tell about her too? Ok, let it go. You have a reason to protect her.
You sang about love a little while ago. Was that about your love for that girl?”

“No, definitely not. Promise.” Vandhiya Thevan was in a hurry to deny.

“Why are you so excited? Why are you so worked up?”

“That’s okay. I don’t have the time to talk about those things. You are holding
the reins of my horse. Let them go. I have a long way to go. It’s an emergency.”

“You have not asked about my work here?”

“If you are ready to tell, well, I am all ears.”

“The banks of the Mullai River have magical powers. Whosoever wants
anything here they’ll get it.”

“I don’t want anything.”

“That’s a lie. A blatant lie. The woman you had in your mind when you sang that

song wants to see you. If you want you can see her.”

“When?”

“Why, tonight itself.”

“What’s this new story?”

“This is no story, Thambi. Look there.”

Vandhiya Thevan looked in that direction. He could see something faintly at a
distance. He focussed his eyes on what he saw. It was a covered palanquin.

Oh My God! The same one! I have seen this before. For sure! Yes, it belongs to
the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur Nandini Devi. Perhaps Nandini is inside the
palanquin.

He could not control his urge to peep in.

He led the horse near the palanquin. The screen on the palanquin, the one that
had the palm tree image on it, rustled. Or it appeared so to a bewildered
Vandhiya Thevan.

He jumped from his horse. At the same time, a strange whistling sound came
from Devaralan’s mouth.

About seven or eight persons sprang from the hiding. They fell on Vandhiya
Thevan and immobilised him.

His limbs were bound. He was blindfolded. A person forcefully took the sword
from him. Vandhiya Thevan was then thrown into the palanquin.

The bearers appeared to be waiting for that moment. They lifted the palanquin
up and started to walk fast. They were joined by more men on the front and
back.

Devaralan led the procession. One of his men was leading Vandhiya Thevan’s
horse. Everything happened in a second. Vandhiya Thevan was overwhelmed by
this sudden attack. The palanquin was being carried away. Vandhiya Thevan
could not believe that he had been caught. He did not know what was
happening. It appeared as if he had lost his thinking faculty.

But as the palanquin moved further his mind gradually recovered its clarity. The
blindfold came off quite easily.

With the bound hands he moved the screen and saw outside. The palanquin had
gotten off from the banks of Mullai River and was taking a small, deserted path
to somewhere.

He could have easily freed his hands and legs. It was not a difficult task for him.
To jump from the palanquin would also be easy.

He knew that his horse was coming in the back. To overpower the seven or eight
men and to flee away in his horse was not something impossible for him. He
even thought of doing it.

But something prevented him. There was a strange smell in the palanquin. At
first, the fragrance filled his mind with enthusiasm. He did not have the heart to
free himself from that sweet smell.

Where would this palanquin take me? There were reasons to believe that he was
being taken to Nandini.

Then a desire to see her beautiful form appeared in the corner of his mind. Then
the desire grew stronger and stronger till it occupied his entire mind.

There were several objections coming from the other part of his mind. But the
desire overcame all those objections.

‘What can she do to me? Let me at least know why she wants to see me. It will do
me good to know about her plans.

If she is smart then I can surely outsmart her. I don’t think I will get a chance to
see her again. I may not have the need to go to Thanjavur again. It will be
dangerous to go there.

It is far safer to see her on the way. Let me also have the pleasure of seeing her
one more time.

And yes, there is one more reason to see Nandini. The mute queen I saw at
Srilanka. She strongly resembled Nandini. At least it appeared so to me. This is
my only chance to confirm that.

As Vandhiya Thevan was lost in thoughts, he suddenly felt dizzy. He felt sleepy.
No, it’s not sleep, he thought. For he had slept for six hours in the afternoon.

He was succumbing to the sweet perfume lingering in the palanquin. That to him
appeared as a greater danger than even an armed foe. He decided to jump off the
palanquin.

Vandhiya Thevan tried to free his hands; but he could not. He could not move
them at all. He tried to sit up. Even that was not possible. He tried to use his legs
to free himself. Even the legs refused to co-operate. His eyelids closed on their
own. His consciousness was slipping away. He swooned.

When he regained his consciousness, the old thoughts came rushing to him. He
tried to jump off the palanquin.

But surprise of surprises! He was not in a palanquin now. He was in a large
room. The room was brightly lit.

And even that room had a kind of smell. But this was different from what he
smelt on the palanquin. This appeared more like incense than perfume. The
earlier fragrance blinded his senses; but this one sharpened them. He sat up on
his bed. He looked around.

The door to the room was open. Vandhiya Thevan eagerly looked at the door.

Nandini walked in through the open door. He was seeing her without battling his
eyelids. He was surprised.

No, he was amazed. There were several reasons for that. The first was her
indescribable beauty. The second was the most unexpected meeting.

And the third was the striking resemblance Nandini bore to the Mute Queen he
had seen in Srilanka. Was it just a resemblance or was he seeing the mute queen
herself, adorned with fine dresses and jewellery.

"You are a good man.”

Nandini told him in a very sweet voice.

“Thanks.”

“The sign of a good man is just to vanish without taking proper leave. You
disappeared from the Thanjavur Palace without taking leave of me.”

Vandhiya Thevan laughed. Nandini continued.

“I helped you to enter the mighty Thanjavur Fort. I gave you my signet ring. The
least you owe me is to return that ring.”

Vandhiya Thevan was ashamed.

“You can return it at least now. You won’t have any use for that in future. I am
sure you don’t have plans to visit the Thanjavur Fort again.”

Nandini extended her slender hand to accept the ring.

“Devi, The Chief of Armed Forces in Lanka, Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari has seized
that ring from me. I am sorry.”

“You have given the ring to my avowed enemy. Your sense of gratitude is
adorable.”

“I didn’t give that on my own, Devi. It was taken from me. By force.”

“I can’t believe that a warrior from the famous Vaana clan was forced to do
something.”

“Your Excellency, it is because of sheer force that I am here now. Your men..... “

“Look deep into yourself. And tell the truth. Nothing but the truth. Did you come
here only because of force? Didn’t you want to come here? Even after being held
in the Palanquin you had a chance to escape.”

Nandini’s pointed accusation hit his heart.

“Yes, Devi. I came on my own will and volition.’”

“Why?”

“Why did you want to see me, Devi?”

“To get back my signet ring.”

“Is that the only reason?”

“There is another reason too. Weren’t you there in the King’s treasury that night?
And I am sure you know that it is my dear husband’s responsibility to safeguard
the treasury.”

Vandhiya Thevan was too shocked to speak.

“Were you thinking that I do not know about your presence in the treasury at that
time? Wonderful! But for me you could not have escaped.”

“Devi”

“Yes, I know. And even the Pazhuvettaraiyar knows. He ordered the guard to kill
you there itself. When he moved away, I somehow changed his orders. And you
were saved.

"And your wonderful friend Kandhanmaran became the victim. But for me your
bones would be lying in a heap along with the heaps of pearls in the treasury.”

Vandhiya Thevan was submerged in a sea of surprise. He could not believe
Nandini’s words. But how did she know that he was hiding there at that time?

He felt that he should thank her at least for the sake of formality.

“Your Excellency...”

He was not coherent.

“Don’t try to thank me.”

“No, Devi... “

“Do you know why I reminded you of what I did to you on that day? Not to
extract gratitude from you. Only to warn you never to use that underground path
again. Security has been tightened now. Got it?”

“I don’t have any idea to go a mile near that place, Devi.”

“Why should you? It’s not in your genes to think of those who helped you in
times of distress. It was only because of you your dear friend was in danger. I
brought him to my Palace, had him treated, cured him and sent him back to his
place. Are you happy? Or perhaps betraying your friends is also a genetic trait in
you like betraying the trust reposed in you?”

Every word spoken by Nandini was like a poisoned arrow, which pierced
Vandhiya Thevan’s heart. He was seething in pain and yet remained silent.

“And you let your companion, the Doctor’s son, to be captured in your place.
Did you ever try to find out what happened to him?”

“I was about to ask you, Devi.”

“I’ll let you know. Provided you tell me what happened to Prince

Arulmozhivarman who left Lanka with you.”

Vandhiya Thevan was startled. She had been torturing him all this time only to
know about the Prince. He decided to be very firm and not let himself deceived
by her charm.

“Your Excellency, please don’t ask me about that.”

“Yes, I should not ask about that. Even if I did you won’t answer. Let it go. How
is your lover? You can at least tell me about her.”

Vandhiya Thevan became furious. Sparks flew from his eyes.

“WHOM ARE YOU TALKING ABOUT? BEWARE!”

“Aha! I am always careful. Don’t think I am talking about that Queen living in
Pazhaiyaarai. She won’t even look at you. She will treat you like a piece of dirt
in her feet. No, I am not concerned about her. I am asking about that lady who
took you to Lanka and brought you back in her boat. That boat-girl,
Poonkuzhali. Isn’t she your lover?”

“No. No. Never. She showed her lovers to me. She showed me the fire-mouthed
ghouls seen on the marshland in Kodikkarai at midnight. She told me that they
were her lovers.”

“How fortunate she is! Her lovers are of the form of light. They appear in all
brightness before her. Whereas mine are of the darkness. I can’t even see their
forms. Have you ever slept in a dark, dilapidated hall at midnight? Have you
ever seen the bats and owls fluttering their wings noisily and flying across the
room? These forms are flying in my mind all the time. They flutter. They hurt.
They rub my cheeks with their rough wings. Where do they come from? Where
are they going? Why are they targeting me? Oh My God! Do you know?”

Nandini acted as if she were possessed. Her eyes, now full of unspeakable fury
were darting all over the place.

Even the strong heart of Vandhiya Thevan was shaken. A part of him felt
compassion towards her whereas the other was filled with a raw fear.

“Please, Devi! Please control yourself. Relax, Devi.”

“Who the hell are you to advise me?”

“I am just a poor youth from the Vana clan. Who are you, Devi?”

“I don’t know. I have been struggling all my life to find the answer for that allimportant question. Who am I? Or are you wondering whether I am a human
being or perhaps, a witch, or a ghoul or some evil spirit?”

“Or perhaps an angel fallen from heaven because of a divine curse…”

“Yes, it’s a divine curse. But I don’t know what it is. I know who am I and why
was I born into this world. God has given me only one indication so far. Look at
this.”

Nandini lifted a sword near her and showed it to Vandhiya Thevan. The sword
should have been recently polished and it glowed in the light of the lamps.

Vandhiya Thevan saw the sword. He immediately recognised it as the sword he
had seen at the blacksmith’s. Hitherto he was writhing in pain hurt by the
poisoned arrows, which came in the form of Nandini’s stinging words.

Now when he saw the sword made of steel his heart became stronger. Yes, he
was quite used to swords and spears. He had been handling them almost since
his birth. He could relate to them.

And there was no trace of fear in him now. Even if Nandini were to use the
sword on him he won’t be afraid. He would face it like a true warrior.

“Yes, Devi. It’s a finely crafted piece. A beautiful sword which should belong to
a Royal family. It should be in the hands of the best of warriors.

"I am wondering how it reached your soft hands, Devi. What does God tell you
by this signal, Devi?”

Chapter 14: The Flying Horse

Nandini lifted the shining sword and fondly held it close to her breast. Then she
brought it to her face and kissed the weapon with her pearly lips. For a moment
it appeared as if a lotus flower was kissing a burning flame. And at another, it
appeared as if blood-coloured clouds were hiding the Full Moon. Nandini’s face
shone in fury, with a rare kind of cruel beauty, like the face of Bhadrakali, the
furious Goddess, who demanded blood from the Kapalikas.

As soon as she restored the sword to its original place her face regained its
original beauty.

“Yes, this sword is God’s sign to me. But I am yet to understand the import of
this sign. I send this sword quite often to the blacksmith to have it polished and
sharpened. I am guarding this sword like a mother tigress would guard her cubs.
The cub should not be caught by the bison of the forest before it comes of age,
right? You know that Arabs take loving care of their horses; in the same way I
am taking care of this weapon. I am serving this sword in the same way as the
Queen Vanamadevi serves her sick husband, Emperor Sundara Chozhan. I don’t
know what is God’s wish – should I insert this into the poisonous chest of a
wicked person or should I bear this on my own breast and use the blood that
gushes out to adorn my body which had hitherto been adorned with the finest of
dresses and jewels.

“The God which gave this sword to me will let me know what I should do at the
opportune time. I do not know when that time would come. I am ready any time.

“The whole country knows that the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur well known for

her beauty is also fond of beautifying herself with the finest of dresses and
jewels. I keep myself beautiful twenty four hours of the day. Poor Soul, the
Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar! He thinks that I am beautifying myself only for him
and his honour. He is pleased. He does not know about the fire that’s constantly
burning in my chest.”

Vandhiya Thevan was in a state of daze. He had never heard Nandini or for that
matter anybody speak in that fashion. After a long time he came back to his
senses and asked her in a weak voice:

“Where is Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar?”

“Why, are you afraid of the old man?”

“Not at all, Your Excellency. I am not even afraid of you. Why should I fear the
Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar?”

“Aha! That’s the reason I like you. I don’t know why but everybody is afraid of
me. The bravest of all warriors, the man who had seen many a battlefield, the
man who bears sixty four war wounds on his body, the one and only Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar is afraid of me.

“The Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar – the one who can even frighten the Lord of Death
– that’s why he is known by the epithet Kalaanthaka Kandar – shivers when he
comes before me. Madhuranthakan, who wants to rule over the vast Chozha
Empire as its sole Emperor, is highly reverential when he is in my presence.

Even the ruling Emperor Sundara Chozhan, who is now peeping into the world
of the Dead, shivers in fear when I go near him. Every time he sees me he faints.
The Pallava Prince Parthibendra Pallavan came to see me today. I have heard of
his bravery and valour. I know that he is the best friend of Crown Prince Adithya
Karikalan.

But within ten minutes of meeting me he became as subdued as my lapdog. He
forgot his duty towards the Crown Prince and follows me like my pet. He is
waiting at my feet ready to fulfil even the slightest of my whims. And yet when
he is near me he is trembling.

I am reminded of a childhood incident. When I was a child I used to love fire. I
would go near fire. I’d love to touch the flames. But at the last minute I would
withdraw my hand. I had no courage to touch it. I have done that several times.

When Parthibendran comes near me and then goes away in fear at the last
minute I am reminded of my experiments with fire as a child.

Not just the Pallava Prince, even your Master, the Crown Prince, as whose
messenger you came from Kanchi, is afraid of me. When we were little, he was
fond of me. Along with that fondness was also a strange kind of fear. And
because of that fear my life has turned upside down.

Will you please carry a message from me to your Master? Tell him that now I am
a grandmother to him through my marriage to Pazhuvettaraiyar. Tell him that he
need not be afraid of seeing me. I won’t eat him if he comes near me. Will you
please do it for me?”

"Devi, I am not sure whether I will return alive to see my Master again. And if I
do I have a lot of things to tell him. I cannot promise you that I’ll carry your
message to him. Please forgive me, Your Excellency.”

“Of all the men I have seen, you are the only one who is really brave. You have
the courage to speak your mind. That’s why I like you.

Oh, the Warrior of the Vaana Clan! I don’t see many people. Unlike the
Pazhaiyaarai Princess I don’t ride on chariots. If at all I need to travel, I go only
in a closed palanquin. I see only those with whom I have some business. And
most of them are cowards. They don’t have the guts to speak their mind. But you
are different. You are bold.”

“There is no gain in hiding things, Devi. No man’s heart can hold secrets which
your roving eyes cannot penetrate and find out.”

“Yes, that may be true. But I am yet to know what is there in your heart. Let it
wait. Didn’t you ask about Pazhuvettaraiyar?

“My husband and that Pallava Prince have gone with their retinue to a nearby
village. There’s a dance and drama show about Kannaki and there’s Velanaattam.
They want to wriggle out anything they can from the dancer when he is
possessed by the spirits. Crazy people! Instead of asking the right person about
the Prince they are barking up the wrong tree. It may take many hours before
they come back. That’s why I asked you to be brought before me.

“I ask you again. Do you know about the Prince? I am sure even if you know
you won’t share that information with me.”

“No, Devi, I won’t. Sorry. I have taken a vow today not to lie at all and to speak
nothing but the truth. Hence I can’t say anything about the Prince.

Sorry again, Your Excellency. A few minutes ago I forgot my vows and lied to
you. Please forgive me.”

Vandhiya Thevan retrieved the signet ring from his waist cloth and gave it to
Nandini.

“Your Excellency, here’s your signet ring. It’s true that Bhoothi Vikrama
Kesari’s men took it from me by force. But the General returned it later. I am
returning it to you. Please accept it and relieve me of my responsibility.”

Nandini looked sharply at the signet ring to confirm whether it was the same that
she gave him.

“It’s not in my nature to take back what I have given as a gift. I asked for the
ring only to test your honesty. You have passed the test in flying colours. You
spared me from the unenviable task of having you frisked by my security guards.
You keep the ring as my gift. As a souvenir.”

“Your Excellency, please do not be in a hurry to give. If I have the signet ring, I
may be tempted to use it again.”

“I couldn’t care less. Use it in whatever way you want. I’ll now have you

blindfolded and ask my men to carry you back in the same palanquin. You’ll be
dropped at the same place from where you were picked up.”

“What if I refuse to that?”

“You can never escape from this dilapidated palace and fort. You’ll be going in
circles.”

“Devi.. this fort.. this dilapidated palace.. “

“The Chozha Empire was under the Pallava rule for a long time. The Pallava
Emperors built this palace and this fort. Then the Chozha Kingdom was subject
to the rule of Pandyas. The Pandya Kings stayed in this palace for a while.

“At the time of Vijayaalaya Chozha, a terrible battle was fought in this place.
The fort was destroyed in the war. More than half of the palace was also
destroyed. We are now in the other half of the palace which survived the war.

“Some call this the ‘Pallavarayan Fort’ and others, ‘Pandiyarayan Fort’. There’s
some truth in both.

But one thing is for sure. Only those who know this fort thoroughly can come in
or go out. Others will be stranded. Now tell me. What’s your choice? Shall I ask
my men to take you out or do you want to find your way out yourself?”

“No, Devi. I don’t have the time to find the way myself. Please ask your men to
take me out. But before I go I wish to know why you wanted to see me. Is there
anything I can do for you?”

“Good. Since you asked I am telling you. I want a horse that can fly. Get me one
if it’s possible.”

“You mean a flying horse?”

“Yes.”

“Do you mean an Arabian horse which can run so fast that it will appear like
flying.. “

“No, No. I can’t get on that type of horses. I am not talking about the horses
which have their feet on ground while they are running. I want a horse that’d
spread its wings and fly across the skies. I have heard in stories that such strange
creatures do exist somewhere on this earth. I want a real flying horse.”

“Why, Your Excellency? Do you want to fly to heaven?”

“Do I look like somebody going to heaven? I am a hardened sinner.”

“Not that all those who live in heaven are good, Devi. Sins are being committed
even in heaven. And as retribution those heavenly beings visit the earth. And go

back to heaven as soon as their work is over.”

“No, I don’t want to go to heaven. There is a desert in the Pandya Kingdom. In
the middle of that desert there are some blunt rocks. Nothing would grow on
them. There are a few caverns on them. The Digambara Jains used to stay in
those caverns and did penance. At present only the snakes and foxes live there. I
like those caverns more than the celestial river of Amaravathi flowing across the
heavens.”

“Devi, that’s a strange wish.”

“If only I had a flying horse, I’ll first go to those caverns. And then fly to
Srilanka. I have heard that the country has mountains that almost reach the sky
and forests dense enough to cover those mountains. I have also heard that herds
of elephants are as common in Lanka as cowherds are in the Chozha Empire. I’ll
see them all. And there are mountains beyond Lanka whose peaks have been
covered by snow ever since the beginning of this world. When the sun rises, they
appear like silver mountains. I’ll sit on my flying horse and fly very close to
those silvery peaks to see their beauty.

And beyond these peaks, I’ve heard that there are deserts which are a thousand
times larger than those in Pandya Kingdom. It is a vast expanse of white sand. In
the morning it will appear as if you are standing right in the middle of a burning
fire. And beyond it there are vast oceans remaining constantly in a frozen state.
People and animals walk over them. I want to fly over those places too.”

“Devi, I can’t get you a flying horse. But there’s an easy way to go to those
places. If you get on a good boat you can reach Lanka in half a day. And if you
can go in a ship.. “

“I know, I know. I am afraid of the sea. I am afraid of getting on a ship. When I
cross a river on a boat, even if the boat shakes a little I’d be frightened. So your
advice is useless to me. You may go now.”

Nandini stood up from her seat.

“Your Excellency, is that all?”

“Yes. But it appears that you want to tell something.”

“Yes, Devi. I have a burning question in my mind. And I seek an answer from
you. Did you by any chance visit Srilanka a few days ago? Did you stand alone
in the dark shadows of the streets of Anuradhapura?”

“No. Not at all. I have never gone beyond Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace or his lines
of security. What makes you ask this question?”

“Devi, a few days ago I saw you in Lanka. You were talking about the flying
horse. Perhaps you have one. I thought you came to Lanka in that flying horse.
But you did not have these dresses and jewels. You were clad in an ordinary
saree and had let lose your hair. Aren’t you the same woman?”

“No, I am not that woman. But tell me, did you hear that lady talk?”

“No. She spoke in the sign language. You have known the sorcerers. Your astral
body must have come there because of some magical powers.”

“If that’s neither me nor my astral body.. then?”

“Then she must be a lady who bears a striking resemblance to you. She could not
talk. She is dumb.”

Nandini was pointlessly staring at a distance. She then let out a long sigh.

“You offered to help me a little while ago. Didn’t you?”

“Yes, I did, Your Excellency.”

“Is that the truth?”

“There is no doubt about it, Devi.”

“Listen. If you happen to see that lady again, try to bring her to me. And if that’s
not possible, at least take me to her.”

Half an hour later Vandhiya Thevan was on the banks of the Mullai River again.
His horse was by his side. Those who brought him there vanished without

leaving a trace. Devaralan could not be seen at all.

Vandhiya Thevan was riding slowly on the banks of the river. He travelled all
night. In the wee hours of the morning he spotted the comet which occupied a
major part of the eastern skies.

The comet had been the source of fear in people. Was it an ominous sign of an
impending disaster or was it just a blind superstition followed by people for
ages?

Nandini came to his mind quite often. Her words were etched on his mind. The
creepy feeling he had when he first saw her in the Thanjavur Palace had
disappeared now. He now had nothing but sympathy for her. She must have had
a hard life, thought the Prince of Vallam.

What is her mission? What does she want to do? What’s her real story?

They were all mysteries to him. And that filled his mind with some kind of
impotent anger towards her. She was an incomparable beauty; on the top of it
she had some magical powers as well. He decided not to have anything to do
with her in the future. It would have been better if she had accepted the signet
ring from him. Or he could toss the ring into the river. He did not have the heart
to do that. These were dangerous times. Anything would be of help. The signet
ring of a Minister might open some important doors for him should he need it.
Why should he throw it away?

‘Once I meet Princess Kunthavai and deliver the messages then I can throw this
ring away. I’ll never venture into such a dangerous mission in future.’

Venus appeared in the sky. Vandhiya Thevan had heard that one should not travel
with Venus in the front. He stopped.

He secured the horse to a large tree. He lay down for a nap.

Chapter 15: The Kalamukas

The rays of the rising sun hit Vandhiya Thevan on his face and woke him up. But
he did not have the heart to get up. He looked around. He saw two ascetics
coming at a distance. They looked quite scary. Their matted locks, their carrying
a trident in one hand and a pot of fire in another – Vandhiya Thevan could infer
that they were Saivite fanatics and belonged to the militant Kalamuka group. He
wanted Azhwarkkadian now by his side to argue against those Kalamukas. He
decided to pretend to sleep till those Kalamukas went away.

He did not open his eyes even when he was sure that they were standing by his
side. One of them came very near him and noisily cleared his throat.

“Shivoham the boy looks like the demon Kumbakarna!”

(Shivoham literally means, I am Shiva and is uttered as a means of salutation by
Saivites and Advaitins. Kumbakarna, Ravana’s brother used to sleep for days on
end because of a twisted boon.)

“Shivoham if we can get a nice young man like this it’ll be good for our
movement.”

“Shivoham don’t get carried away by his handsome face. He’s useless. A big
danger awaits him.”

Hearing those words and pretending to sleep was more difficult than holding his
breath. And yet, Vandhiya Thevan continued with his pretensions; for if he woke
up now his lie would be out in the open and he cannot listen to their conversation
any more. Perhaps they might even give a hint about the imminent danger.

But his hopes were belied.

“Shivoham, that’s his destiny. Come, let’s go.”

The ascetics walked away.

Vandhiya Thevan woke up after some time.

”A big danger awaits him.” – These words were ringing in his ears for a long
time.

Kalamukas came from the traditional Kaapalikas. Kaapalikas used to give
human sacrifice to appease the gods. Kalamukas did not do that; but otherwise
they followed the same rituals and traditions of Kapaalikas. Many believed that
the Kalamukas had the powers to predict the future, thanks to their gory penance
in the cremation grounds. Laymen even thought that they had the powers to
inflict curses on people.

Nobody wanted to displease those people. People readily gave whatever they
wanted. Many chieftains had created land endowments to provide food to
Kalamukas. But the Emperors of the Chozha clan did not patronise this militant

sect.

As Vandhiya Thevan knew all these, he was not perturbed much.

’Let them say whatever they want to. I have faced many dangers on the way. One
more will not make any difference.’ He consoled himself.

But the desire to know about his future persisted in his mind. When Vandhiya
Thevan stood up he could see the two ascetics approaching an old Mandapam at
a distance. There was an artificial hillock near the mandapam. One of the
caverns in the hillock was in the shape of a lion, its entrance like the lion’s
mouth. The caverns originally built by the Digambara Jains were now occupied
by the Kalamukas.

Vandhiya Thevan wanted to strike a conversation with those ascetics. He left the
horse there and went towards the cavern. When he reached the Mandapam he
could hear them talking.

“That boy was not faking; he was really asleep.”

“How are you so sure about that?”

“Even after hearing the word danger he did not show any interest to know about
it. I don’t know of anybody so apathetic.”

“The boy seems to be a warrior. Why don’t we recruit him to our group?”

“What can we do with young men like him? The person who is going to ascend
the Chozha Throne is going to join us.”

“Who are you referring to?”

“Who else but Madhuranthakan! Don’t you know?”

“I know. But how is it possible? What about the other two contenders?”

“One is drowned. The other’s days in this world are numbered.”

Vandhiya Thevan no longer wanted to listen to them. Nor was he interested in
talking to them.

He just wanted to deliver the message to the Princess at Pazhaiyaarai and return
to Kanchi.

‘My first duty is towards my master Adithya Karikalan. He is surrounded by
dangers. Even his best friend Parthibendra Pallavan has fallen for Nandini.
Karikalan’s rashness is his worst enemy. I don’t know what kind of danger
surrounds him right now. I have a duty to be by his side and protect him from
this cruel world. It’s a crime to waste my time here. I need to go right now.’

Vandhiya Thevan silently walked back to his horse. He jumped on it and rode
fast. When he crossed the Kalamukas he was aware of their staring at him. One
of the faces appeared familiar. But he was not keen to know. He rode forward.

He saw many crowded villages on the way. The news of the Prince’s death had
not reached those villages. People were busy with their lives.

‘So far so good. I should reach Pazhaiyaarai before the news about the Prince
reaches there. And tell the truth to the Princess. If this rumour reaches the ears
of Princess before I do, the consequences might be disastrous. Princess
Kunthavai may not believe it. But what about that soft girl, Princess Vanathi?
She might die of shock.’

Vandhiya Thevan suddenly became quite tense. His horse did not seem to share
his anxiety. The new protection on the hoof had slowed down the horse.

When the great wall of Pazhaiyaarai Fort appeared before his eyes, sunset was
hardly an hour away.

He saw the temple of Goddess Durga at the Fort. His mind was flooded with a
million ideas of how to enter that well-guarded fort. None of them seemed
feasible. The signet ring given by Nandini would not help here. The security
guards would have been alerted about some spy coming with that signet ring.
Once they saw the ring they would immediately arrest him and despatch him to
the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. He did not want to be caught before having a
glimpse of Princess Kunthavai.

These thoughts slowed him down. When he approached the entrance he saw a
group of people coming from the opposite direction. There were a lot of soldiers,
some on horses some wielding spears and some bearing the standards of a
member of the Royal household. And in the centre of the contingent was a lotusshaped chariot.

‘Oh My God! Who’s that in the chariot! For heaven’s sake, is it not Prince
Madhuranthakan?’ The same Prince whom he met for the first time in the
Kadambur Palace and later in the underground treasury at Thanjavur.

Vandhiya Thevan now knew how to enter the Fort. And that idea made him quite
enthusiastic.

“Even after hearing the word danger he did not show any interest to know about
it. I don’t know of anybody so apathetic.”

Vandhiya Thevan remembered the words of the Kalamuka. Yes, he himself for a
moment succumbed to that curiosity. Why not he practise the same trick here?
He urged his tired horse to run fast towards the lotus-shaped chariot. None of
Madhuranthakan’s guards had expected such a rash move from a person on the
street. Before they could think of blocking his way, his horse had come very
close to the chariot.

Vandhiya Thevan stood up on his horse. And then looked at Madhuranthakan
seated inside the chariot. He raised his voice and shouted “DANGER!
DANGER!”. And then fell down on the ground and rolled on the sand. The
horse stopped a little further from him.

All these happened within a few seconds. Some of the soldiers had drawn their
swords on seeing the horse. Some of them had lifted their spears and were ready
to hurl them on Vandhiya Thevan.

But when they saw Vandhiya Thevan falling down from the horse they were all
relieved. They started laughing at him. Prince Madhuranthakan too joined them
in their laughter. The chariot came to a stop.

Madhuranthakan signalled his soldiers. They went near Vandhiya Thevan and
tried to lift him. But he got up on his own. He was not bothered about his fall;
but was staring at the face of the Prince.

“Bring him here!” roared the Prince. Two soldiers held Vandhiya Thevan’s hands
and brought him before the Prince. Vandhiya Thevan’s eyes were still on
Madhuranthakan’s face.

“Who are you?” – Madhuranthakan asked.

“I am me. Oh, Emperor of Emperors, don’t you recognise me?”

“What are you blabbering? Hey, you stand aside.” The soldiers moved away.

“Who do you think I am?”

“Forgive me, Prince. I was wrong, Prince. You are. .. .. still.. still… . “

“Have you seen me before?”

“Yes, I have. No, I haven’t.”

“Have you seen me or not? Speak the truth.”

“I took a vow yesterday to speak nothing but the truth. That’s why I am not so
sure.”

“Oh! So you are speaking the truth only from yesterday. That’s quite funny.” –
Madhuranthakan laughed.

“But why should that prevent you from being sure? Either you have met me
earlier or not. What’s the big confusion in that?”

“Nothing is sure, these days, Prince. One man looks like another. Sometimes the
person is in a closed palanquin. At other times he is in a chariot.”

“What did you say?” – Madhuranthakan was shocked.

“I was saying that, since there are two people who strongly resemble each other,
I am not so sure.”

“Who do I resemble?”

“I have seen you, or somebody exactly like you, twice. I am not sure whether it
is you or somebody who resembles you. Just to make sure.. “

“You stood on your horse and were looking at me, right?”

“Yes, Prince.”

“What did you see?”

“You may be the person I saw earlier. Or may not be, Your Excellency.”

Madhuranthakan was angry. This was evident from his face and the tone of his
voice.

“You are a cheat. I am going to.. “

“Please don’t be angry with me, Prince. Let me tell you where I saw you or
somebody resembling you. Then you can decide what the truth is.”

“Where?”

“It was a huge fort surrounded by long walls on all the four sides. Many warriors
were assembled. The time was midnight. The light coming from the oil lamp
was dimmed by smoke. And yet one could see that the warriors were furious
over something. There was a palanquin near the wall. The leader of the warriors
was repeatedly questioned by others. He lost his temper. He walked to the
palanquin and removed the silk screen. A very handsome man appeared from
inside.”

Madhuranthakan did not interrupt Vandhiya Thevan.

“The soldiers hailed his presence. They were shouting slogans in his praise.
‘Hail The Crown Prince’ – some shouted. ‘Hail The Emperor’ others shouted. At
least that’s what I remember. The face of the person, who came out of the
palanquin, strongly resembled your face. If I had uttered anything wrong, Your
Excellency should be kind enough to forgive me.”

When Vandhiya Thevan finished talking, drops of sweat appeared on
Madhuranthakan’s forehead. The fear on his face was quite palpable.

“Hey, the one who has vowed to speak the truth from yesterday, were you
amongst the crowd of warriors at that time?”

“No, Your Excellency. I promise and swear I was not there.”

“Then how are you able to describe it so precisely?”

“I don’t know whether what I saw was real, or a vision or a mere dream. Let me
describe one more scene to you, Your Excellency. It’s a dark dungeon. It’s below
the ground level. A path, snakes around the dungeon, goes further down before
climbing up. Three men are coming up that way. The person in the front holds a
torch to show the way. The one on the back acted like a guard. In the middle was
a very handsome young man – as handsome as the Love God himself.

When the light from the torch spread to the nooks and corners of the dungeon
one could see gold, diamonds and precious gems glowing even in that faint light.
That must be the treasury of the Emperor of Emperors. On the pillars were
sculpted many gory shapes and forms. Of the three men who walked that path on
that day, the one in the middle, strongly resembled you Prince. You will have to
tell me whether it is true or not.”

“STOP IT, I SAY!”

Madhuranthakan shouted. There was tangible fear in his voice.

Vandhiya Thevan remained silent.

“Are you a soothsayer?”

“Well, that is not exactly my profession. But I can tell your past as well as your
future.”

“When you stood on your horse you shouted something. What was that?”

“I shouted “DANGER! DANGER!”

“Danger to whom?”

“You, Prince.”

“What danger?”

“You are surrounded by several dangers, Prince. At the same time so many
prestigious positions await you. I need a lot of time to tell you about all that.
Your men have taken away my sword. If you take me into the Fort.. I’ll.. . “

“Ok, come with me. Let’s talk about it later.”

Madhuranthakan summoned the Chief of his guards. He ordered that Vandhiya
Thevan be brought to the Fort along with his retinue. The Chief was not happy.
And yet he had no choice but to obey. Vandhiya Thevan was taken into the Fort.

A little later the huge gates of Pazhaiyaarai Fort opened. Madhuranthakan and
his retinue, and along with them, Vandhiya Thevan, entered the Fort.

Chapter 16: Prince Madhuranthakan

Emperor Sundara Chozhan succeeded his uncle - – his father’s elder brother,
Kandaraathitha Chozhar. He and his wife, Sembian Madevi who was Chieftain
Mazhavaraiyar’s daughter were ardent devotees of Lord Shiva. They spent most
of their lives in repairing and renovating the temples of Shiva across the empire.

It was Kandaraathithar’s avowed mission to compile the divine verses of the
Tamil devotional book, Devaram. But he could not do that within his life-time.
He gathered a few songs. He also composed a few on his own on similar lines.
Of those he composed, the one he sung on Chidambaram is even now available
in a compilation called Thiruvisaippa.

In his composition Kandaraathithar sings praises of his father, Emperor
Paranthaka, who gifted a golden roof to the temple of the Dancing Lord,
Nataraja, at Chidambaram.

The Chozha King wielding a just sceptre
The one popular as ‘Kozhi Vendhan’
The one who conquered the Pandyas
And the Lankans
Covered the towers of the beautiful temple
At Chidambaram where the Lord
Adorned with a bracelet of bones

Sings and dances
We mediate on thee, Oh Shiva
When are we to become one with Thee!

In the last song of the compilation the Chozha King mentions his own name and
also mentions the fact that during his times Thanjavur was the Chozha capital.

‘Those who are well versed in the poems composed by the King of Thanjavur, the
Chozha Emperor, the Master of many orchards, the one who sang about the
Great Dancer who forever dances in the golden-roofed Chidambaram shall be
honoured and be happy in this world.’

Kandaraathithar did not believe in expanding his Kingdom by waging wars. He
was upset by the devastation caused by war. He tried to avoid confrontation as
much as possible. He sought peace at all cost. Thanks to this policy the Chozha
Empire contracted in size during his times.

Kandaraathithar married Chieftain Mazhavaraiyar’s daughter when he was rather
old. His son Madhuranthakan was an infant when Kandaraathithar breathed his
last. At that time the Empire was surrounded by enemies. And to make matters
worse Kandaraathithar’s brother Arinchaya Chozha had been mortally wounded
in a combat and was counting his days.

Arinchaya Chozhan’s son, Sundara Chozhan, was at that time in the prime of his
youth. He had fought many a battle and had been acclaimed as one of the bravest
warriors of the Empire.

Kandaraathithar, therefore, decided that Sundara Chozhan should succeed him as
the Emperor of the Chozha Empire. The old emperor was shrewd enough to
foresee that this shift in the line of succession might sow seeds of controversy in
future. Hence he proclaimed to his Council of Ministers and to his people, that
Sundara Chozhan would be succeeded by his heirs. He thus effectively removed
his own children and grand children from the line of succession.

Having done that Kandaraathithar requested his wife to bring up their only son,
Madhuranthakan, in religious ways, making him an ardent devotee of Lord
Shiva. The deceased Emperor’s wishes were known to all the people in the
Empire. His wife never went against the words of her husband. Even while
Madhuranthakan was young she had injected into his veins a great devotion for
Lord Shiva, keeping him as far away as possible from the ways of this world.

Till Madhuranthakan was twenty his mother’s word was the law to him. He was
never interested in the affairs of the country or Government. He never even
thought that he could be a possible claimant to the Chozha throne. That was two
years ago, before he married the daughter of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

And then came a change of heart. At first the desire for power was weak; but
when the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur, fanned that desire with all her charm, it
grew like a wild fire ready to destroy the whole forest. The fire was fuelled by
the web of conspiracy tactically woven by the Chieftains of the Chozha Empire,
with the intention of making Madhuranthakan the next Emperor.

The conspirators led by the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar were impatiently waiting for
Sundara Chozhan’s death to crown Madhuranthakan.

But Madhuranthakan could not wait that long. He was impatient and restless. He
had started thinking that Sundara Chozhan was not entitled to the throne and that

he alone was the rightful heir. Now that Sundara Chozha was sick and could not
attend to the affairs of the country, why not he take charge now itself?

It became Pazhuvettaraiyars’ responsibility to keep Madhuranthakan’s ambition
under check. They did not want him to be in a hurry and spoil the good fortune
that was coming their way.

The two sons of Sundara Chozhan were acclaimed warriors. Because of their
valour and other noble qualities they were already sitting on the thrones in the
hearts of the people.

The Kodumbalur Chieftain and Thirukkovalur Malayaman (Sundara Chozhan’s
father-in-law) supported the two Princes. A majority of the soldiers in the army
also preferred the children of Sundara Chozhan to the effeminate
Madhuranthakan.

The Pazhuvettaraiyars, therefore, decided to be patient till the Emperor was
alive. In the meanwhile they also came to know that the Emperor’s mind had
now changed and that he himself preferred Madhuranthakan to his own sons.

If only the Emperor were to proclaim, like his father’s brother did earlier, that
Madhuranthakan should succeed him, then their mission would be accomplished
without mutiny or bloodshed.

There were two major obstacles, however. One was Princess Kunthavai and the
other was Madhuranthakan’s mother, Sembian Madevi. The Pazhuvettaraiyars
were confident of winning over Princess Kunthavai by scheming against her.

But if Madhuranthakan’s mother, Sembian Madevi, the woman regarded as a
holy angel by the people of Tamilnadu, were to oppose Madhuranthakan then
there was no hope. It was well known that the soft-natured lady did not want her
son to succeed Sundara Chozhan.

If Madhuranthakan went against his mother’s word the people would not accept
him as a king.

There were only two possible solutions to this problem.

Either Sembian Madevi should die. Or somebody should change her mind. Who
else can do that better than her only son, Madhuranthakan?

Pazhuvettaraiyars were constantly urging Madhuranthakan to meet his mother
and try to change her mind. But the Prince was not quite enthusiastic about it.
Yes, there was a burning desire to become the King of the great empire. But he
hated to discuss that subject with his mother.

His mother Sembian Madevi had sent word to Thanjavur that she was about to
fulfil one of the wishes of her late lamented husband and that it would be better
if her son were with him at that time.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, Madhuranthakan’s father-in-law, saw that as a golden
opportunity. He urged his son-in-law to leave for Pazhaiyaarai immediately. He
also advised him to talk to his mother about his rightful claim for the Chozha
Throne; and to win her over to their side by his strong arguments.

Chapter 17: Thirunaaraiyur Nambi

Madhuranthakan entered the Pazhaiyaarai city along with his retinue and
Vandhiya Thevan. He went in a procession passing through the colonies of the
soldiers of Chozha Empire. There were so many of them – Aryappadai Veedu,
Pambaippadai Veedu, Puduppadai Veedu and Manappadai Veedu. And then
through the city’s market, residential colonies of common people, temples and
the streets surrounding the temples.

A few people were standing at their house-gates to watch the Royal procession.
Vandhiya Thevan soon noticed that the people were not enthusiastic to see the
effeminate Prince. He could not help remembering the first time he entered this
city. At that time the whole city was submerged in festivities. What a striking
contrast, thought the Prince of Vallam. The streets were virtually deserted now. It
appeared as if Pazhaiyaarai had been abandoned by its own people.

The people of the city did not like Madhuranthakan let alone love him. That was
quite obvious. In a way it was convenient for Vandhiya Thevan. For if there had
been a rousing reception for Madhuranthakan somebody might have recognised
Vandhiya Thevan and that could have made matters complicated.

As the procession was approached the ancient palace of the Chozha Kings, they
saw another large procession coming from the opposite side. In the centre of that
procession was an open palanquin. They could not recognise the sole occupant
of the palanquin. But one could infer that he was a devotee of Lord Shiva. He
was very young. Huge crowds of people were walking in front of and behind the
palanquin. Many of them carried cymbals and drums and were singing
devotional songs.

In between the songs they were shouting slogans as well.

“Thiruchitrambalam!”

“Harahara Mahadeva!”

“Hail Thirunaaraiyur Nambi!”

“Hail The Saint Who Has Won the Grace of the Mischievous Lord Ganesh of
Thirunaaraiyur!”

Madhuranthakan saw the other procession. He struggled hard to contain his
jealousy. He enquired the soldier about the other procession.

“My Lord, the one who comes in the open palanquin is Saint Thirunaaraiyur
Nambi”

“What a grand reception! And there’s nobody to receive us. So many people are
here to make a hue and cry about an ordinary ascetic.” – Words blurted out from
Madhuranthakan’s mouth.

The other procession passed them at a distance. And yet Vandhiya Thevan saw a
familiar face. One of the persons walking near the palanquin had travelled with
him when he crossed the Coleroon River in a boat. He remembered the person as
a fanatic Saivite who argued ferociously with Azhwarkkadian on that day.

Madhuranthakan and his retinue reached the Palace Road and finally arrived at
their destination, the palace of his mother, Sembian Madevi. The Queen Mother
was standing at her palace gates. It was evident that she was there to receive
somebody. Madhuranthakan got down from his chariot and went to his mother.
He touched her feet. She kissed his forehead and blessed him.

“You could not have come at a better time, my son. Do you know that Saint
Thirunaaraiyur Nambi is visiting us today? It is all right if you want some time
to refresh yourself. But do it fast. And then come to the Palace auditorium. Will
you?”

Vandhiya Thevan did not fail to notice that Prince Madhuranthakan’s face fell on
hearing his mother’s words. Poor fellow, Madhuranthakan. He thought his
mother was there at the gates only to receive him. What a disappointment! To
know that his mother was waiting only to receive the Saint whose procession he
had passed just now was a severe blow to the Prince’s pride.

They all moved to the lodgings allotted for them in the Palace. Madhuranthakan
took his own time to freshen himself. He was not very keen to visit the
auditorium. Meanwhile the Queen Mother was sending messenger after
messenger asking her son to rush to the auditorium.

At last Madhuranthakan reluctantly left for the auditorium. As he was leaving he
shouted to his men. “Where is that soothsayer?”

“Here I am, Your Excellency. I am ready to go.” Vandhiya Thevan was quite
reverential as he was anxious to go to the auditorium along with
Madhuranthakan.

Madhuranthakan took Vandhiya Thevan and a few other men with him.

The Queen Mother was holding court at the auditorium. She, Princess Kunthavai
and a few other women of the royal household were seated on one side of the
hall. A very young man was sitting on a lone seat placed at the centre of the
auditorium. Holy ash was smeared all over his body. Holy beads adorned his
neck. His face was glowing in divine grace. There were clusters of palm leaves
scattered before him.

He held a palm leaf in his hand. An ecstatic old man was standing by his side.
His body too had been smeared of the holy ash. And there were beads around his
neck too. The auditorium was full.

Vandhiya Thevan now knew that the young man seated in the centre was the
saint he saw in the palanquin earlier. And the old man standing by his side was
the one he saw on the boat as he was crossing the Coleroon River after visiting
the Kadambur Palace.

Though his eyes were darting all around the auditorium they rested on the
beautiful face of Princess Kunthavai quite often. When her eyes met his at first
she showed some signs of surprise. But then she appeared to completely ignore
his presence. Vandhiya Thevan thought that perhaps she had not yet identified
him.

When Madhuranthakan entered the auditorium everyone except the women
stood in respect. As soon as he sat on the chair assigned to him his mother talked
to him.

“My son, this young saint hails from Thirunaaraiyur. He has got the grace of the
Mischievous Lord Ganesh of that place. He has gathered some rare songs of
Devaram which nobody has seen so far.

“Long ago a woman born in our Chozha clan, known as Mangayarkkarasi
became the Pandya Queen. On her invitation the great saint
Thirugnanasambandar came to Madurai. There he won the Jains by his
arguments and by doing some miracles. This saint, Thirunaaraiyur Nambi, has
got some of the songs composed by Thirugnanasambandar in Madurai at that
time. In those songs the great saint has eulogised our Chozha lady,
Mangayarkkarasi. When I hear those songs I become excited. If only your father
were alive today to hear them.... Will you please hear those songs?”

“I will, Ma. Let the singing start.”

But Madhuranthakan was not quite happy. His mind was elsewhere. This was his
palace and the Queen Mother, his own mother. And even here some young
ascetic is given the seat of importance while he was relegated to the side. He had
to struggle hard to maintain his patience and indulge his mother.

Thirunaaraiyur Nambi started reading from the palm leaf he held in his hand. As
soon as Thirugnanasambandar sighted Madurai he exclaimed, ‘Oh this is the
town of Mangayarkkarasi.’ And composed a song in her honour.

The pride of the Chozha clan, Mangayarkkarasi
Adorned with beautiful bangles, a saint herself

The Pandya Queen, beautiful like a lotus,
Who served the country
Lives here
And the great blue-necked Lord
The Master of the ghosts
The one who gave us the
Essence of our scriptures
Lives here in this Madurai too
Along with his wife
Whose eyes are like the fish,
The veritable Angayarkkani herself.
An offspring of the great Chozhas
Who wears jewelled crowns
And rules over the world
The Queen of Pandyas
Possessed of a sweet voice
Humble and generous
Lives in this town
Where resides the great
Lord Shiva who is pleased
To stay here with his consort Uma.

When Sembian Madevi heard those songs, pearly tear drops started to flow from
her eyes. She felt blessed of being married into a clan in which
Mangayarkkarasi, the one praised by one of the principal Nayanmars was born.
She was grateful to her Lord for the honour which was conferred on her only
because of the good deeds she did in her past lives.

An offspring of the great Chozhas
Who wears jewelled crowns
And rules over the world

Madhuranthakan was impressed only by these lines. The bejewelled crown of
the ancient Chozha rightfully belonged to him. It should adorn his head and none
other. When he thought of the crown being stolen from his head he was quite
furious.

Meanwhile Thirunaaraiyur Nambi continued his narration.

Saint Gnanasambandar, still a child, goes to see the Pandyan Queen,
Mangayarkkarasi. The Queen is now unduly worried for the safety of the child.

“How can this sweet child engage in a war of words with those devils, the Jains?
How can this child hope to win?”

Sensing the fears of the Queen the child-saint composes a song to pacify her.

“Oh the great Queen of Pandyas
The one with the eyes of a doe
You need not worry
Because I am but a child
I look like a child to you
But not to those devils
Whom I have won in Anamalai
And other places
Thanks to the grace of the Lord of Madurai”

When Thirunaaraiyur Nambi sang the song the Queen Mother imagined herself
as the Pandya Queen Mangayarkkarasi and saw Thirunaaraiyur Nambi as Saint
Thirugnanasambandar himself.

The same song gave rise to a different line of thoughts in Madhuranthakan.

“Yes, I might look like a child. But I will never fear Thirukkovilur Malaiyaman,
Kodumbalur Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari or the sons of Sundara Chozhan who are
supported by these people. Sambandar had the support of the Lord of Madurai;
and I have the support of the Pazhuvettaraiyars.”

Vandhiya Thevan’s mind was not in the song. His heart and his eyes were fully
on Princess Kunthavai.

“The Princess has not recognised me. Or perhaps she is deliberately avoiding
me. Is she upset over the fact that I did not report to her immediately on
completing the tasks assigned to me? How am I going to meet her alone and
deliver the all-important message to her?”

As soon as the singing was over the Queen Mother addressed the old man
standing by the side of Thirunaaraiyur Nambi.

“This man appears to me as the reincarnation of Thirugnanasambandar himself.
You please take him to all the towns of Tamilnadu. Gather all the songs of
Devaram which you can find in those towns. We should have compilations of the
songs of Thirunavukkarasar, Thirugnanasambandar and Sundaramurthy Nayanar.
And we should make sure that these songs are sung in all the Shiva temples in
the country every day. This was my late husband’s wish. I want to see this
happen in my life time at least. I’ll make arrangements for your travel. I will
give you palanquins, men and any other thing you may need for this great
mission.

I’ll seek the Emperor’s permission for this enterprise through my son
Madhuranthakan.”

Her proclamation was greeted by a thunderous applause and shouting of slogans
from the people.

The sounds of jubilation appeared quite torturous to Madhuranthakan.

Chapter 18: The Soothsayer

The Queen Mother was about to dissolve the Court she had assembled to receive
Saint Thirunaaraiyur Nambi (who later became famous as Nambiyaandar
Nambi).

She told her son:

“Let me see off these people at the gates of the Palace. You may in the
meanwhile retire to your quarters to freshen yourself up. I need to discuss
something very important with you.”

“As you please, Ma.”

Madhuranthakan left the palace for his lodgings. Hard feelings of fury and
jealousy filled his mind.

‘Why should my mother make such a fuss over some ascetic on the street? An
attitude like this is sure to bring disgrace to the Royal family. No wonder the
Pazhuvettaraiyars are constantly complaining about my mother. Whosoever
comes to her with a body smeared in holy ash and with a neck full of beads
singing some devotional songs or talks about some repair or renovation work at
some temple or tank – the lady gives them loads and loads of money. If she is not
controlled she might even bankrupt the Empire.

And there is always that Princess Kunthavai to add fuel to the fire. She is
constantly by my mother’s side. And if by chance there is any money left over
after donating to temples and ascetics, Kunthavai would splurge it on some
hospitals. If these ladies are like this, how will my dreams come true? How can I
ascend the Chozha throne, send my army in all the directions and bring the
entire land under my rule?

And my mother wants to talk something personal with me. What personal! She
says it’s pretty important. What is she going to say, I don’t know. Can’t even
guess! Maybe she’d talk about the intricate yoga practices... Ashtanga Yoga,
Nidhithyasan... meditation.... May be she might lecture on the trick of seeing the
tip of one’s own nose which would make one an expert of all the known arts. Or
perhaps she might start talking on the cosmic dance of Lord Nataraja. That
would be an elaborate lecture on the inner meaning of the dance, the hidden
significance of the Lord’s matted hair and the crescent moon adorning his hair.

She has been constantly lecturing me only on these topics and now the people
have started to think that I am losing my mind. No, I won’t let her talk on
anything spiritual. And if she insists, I won’t even let a single word pass through
my ears.

Let it be! Before my mother calls me again let me finish my business with the
soothsayer. How did he know those two secrets, which nobody else in this world
knows? Yes, it’s quite surprising. He should have some mysterious powers.

As he knows my past he may also have the powers to divine my future. Let me
talk to him and find that out for myself.’

Madhuranthakan saw the soothsayer darting his eyes all around, quite unsure of
himself when he was in the Court Hall. He signalled the soothsayer to follow

him.

Meanwhile Vandhiya Thevan desperately wanted to meet the eyes of the
Princess and communicate his presence by sign language. But the Princess
perfectly ignored him and walked away with the Queen Mother.

‘What is happening? Has the Princess forgotten me? Yes, perhaps. She is seeing
thousands of men and women every day. How can she remember somebody she
might have seen once or twice?

The problem lies in me. I’ve gone mad. With love? Even while being caught in
the worst of disasters, be it day or night, I was thinking of nothing but the
beautiful face of the Princess. But why should she think of me?

It’s quite natural for the bee to go around the flower thirsting for its honey. But
why should the flower concern itself about the bee? The flower is smiling forever
at the bright sun. So who’s the Sun-God who can make this flower’s face
blossom?

But wouldn’t she have the curiosity to know the result of my dangerous mission?
Or perhaps somebody else might have told her about my trip to Lanka. How is
that possible? No, not at all! Kunthavai appeared sad and distressed. Probably
she is sad because she has not recognised me. She appointed me as her personal
messenger to carry a secret message to Lanka. And now seeing me as part of the
other group, as a part of Prince Madhuranthakan’s retinue, how on earth can
she recognise me.

If only I meet her by some chance, and tell her the kind of tricks I had to play to

gain access into the city, how surprised will she be! But how to meet her? How
to send word to her?

"Hey Soothsayer! Lost in thoughts?”

Vandhiya Thevan was startled by Madhuranthakan’s voice. By that time they had
reached the personal lodgings of Madhuranthakan.

In those days there were many types of people who could foretell the future.
There were astrologers, fortune-tellers, palmists and soothsayers. Astrologers
would study the horoscopes and the planetary movements before predicting the
future. The fortune tellers would divine the future of their customers by closely
observing the words they use, the time when their services were sought, or from
the answer given by the customer to a random question like ‘Tell me any number
from 1 to 108’. Palmistry has remained the same from those days till today
focussing only on the lines on one’s hand.

Soothsayers were a cut above the rest. Like the seers and rishis, they could see
the future with their inner eyes.

Focussing the powers of their mind they could see the past, the present and the
future and describe it as if they were seeing it before them. Some soothsayers
would close their eyes, sit in a calm place to meditate and then pour out
whatever they see. Others would glance pointedly at the tip of the flame of a
burning lamp and dole out their predictions. Still others would tell the past and
predict the future merely by looking at the faces of their subjects. Apart from
these special types blessed with rare powers, there were a million others who
would venture to foretell the future based on the very obvious signs – like for
example whether the crow flew to the left or right of the subject when the
subject walked into the place.

Vandhiya Thevan was startled to hear the Prince calling him “Soothsayer”. He
could not even guess what kind of questions the Prince would ask him. He
would have to cleverly field those questions.

‘How can I get away from him? How can I meet the Princess alone and talk to
her about my mission?’

“Nothing, Your Excellency. I was thinking that instead of being a soothsayer if
only I had studied a few devotional verses like the young man whom we saw in
the court today... Oh My God! What honours! Royal patronage! I would have
been the centre of attraction today.”

“Who prevented you from doing that? You can also learn those verses and sing
them in the Royal Court.”

“There’s no point in desiring the impossible, Prince. It’s all written on one’s
head. And nobody can change it, Your Excellency.”

“Now tell me about the young man who sang Devaram verses. Tell me how his
future will be.”

“He is going to be a celebrated saint, Your Excellency. The young man will lead
a majestic life, both spiritually and temporally. Emperors and Empresses will
wait for their turn to serve him. His name will be remembered along with the
names of the greatest saints this world has ever seen.”

Of course Vandhiya Thevan was throwing out his predictions at random. But the
force with which he delivered his predictions unsettled the Prince.

“Tell me about my future.”

“Yours is also similar to that of that young ascetic, Your Excellency. I can see a
mixture of spiritual and temporal blessings being heaped on you. I would say
that yours is a shade better than his.”

“Come on. Explain.”

Vandhiya Thevan needed some time to organise his thoughts.

“Soothsaying is not something to be done in a hurry. There’s a way to do things.
Ask your men to light a lamp. And light incense as well. You should sit behind
the lamp. I will then be able to see your future and relay it to you, Your
Excellency.”

Madhuranthakan was excited. He ordered his men to light the lamp and the
incense. Two seats were placed – one in front of the lamp and another behind it.
Madhuranthakan sat on one and asked Vandhiya Thevan to sit on the other.

Vandhiya Thevan closed his eyes and pretended to meditate. His mouth was
constantly murmuring some mantras. Then he shook his body violently as if he
were possessed. The shivering continued.

Finally he opened his eyes. He focused his vision on the lamp before him. He
glanced at Madhuranthakan and started to pour out his predictions.

"Please pardon me Your Excellency if I had been rash or discourteous while
talking to you. Your fortune is not something ordinary. There is absolutely no
comparison between your fortune and that of the young ascetic who sang in the
Court today. Yes, that ascetic will enjoy Royal comforts but that is because of the
patronage of Emperors. But you... Oh My God! What I see about your future in
this lamp simply baffles me!”

“What do you see? Please don’t leave out any detail. Tell me. I can’t wait any
longer.”

“How am I going to say, Your Excellency? I don’t have words to describe what I
see. I see a long queue of Kings wearing bejewelled crowns. Ministers, officials
and Chieftains stand in long rows. And beyond them is the vast sea of soldiers.
The spears and the swords held by them, the shield they wear on their chests...
they are so bright that they blind the eyes. I can see people standing on all the
high-rise buildings. I see crowds of people thronging the Forts and buildings. I
could hear them shouting some slogans..... “

“Tell me. What are they shouting... please! “

“Because so many people are shouting at the same time I cannot hear the words
clearly. “Hail The Descendant of Chozhas! Hail the Emperor of The Three
Worlds! Hail the King of Kings!”

“Then?”

“The crowds advance. The soldiers with swords and spears block the people.
Pandemonium prevails for a while.”

“That’s okay. But tell me why are they gathered in that place?”

“That’s what I am going to see right now. I can see the Tiger Flag flying high in
the centre of the crowd. And below that flag flies the Fish Flag, The Palm Flag,
The Lion Flag, The Ox Flag and The Pig Flag.

“I can see a hall as grand as the celestial palace above the skies. In the centre of
the hall lies a golden throne studded with priceless gems. And near the throne on
a pedestal lies a crown studded with diamonds whose sparkle would rival a
thousand suns.

“Above the throne is the Royal parasol which is as cool and as shining as the
moon itself. Women who look like celestial beauties are waiting near the throne
with fans in their hands. I can see a row of golden pots containing water from all
the holy rivers of the country. Yes, Your Excellency, the stage is set for a grand
coronation ceremony.”

“Tell me who is going to be crowned?”

“I’ll know that in a few minutes. The main gate to the hall opens. Many men
heralding the visit of dignitaries enter the hall. And then a majestic old man

enters the hall. I can see somebody like his younger brother coming behind him.
And behind him comes a Prince who is as handsome as the Love God himself.”

“Pray, tell me, who is that Prince?”

Vandhiya Thevan cast a sharp glance at the Prince and then looked at the light of
the lamp.

“Your Excellency, he looks like you. No not like you. It’s you. Those two old
men take you to the throne. ‘May He Be Victorious’ – This slogan reverberates
in the skies. Hundreds of hands throw flowers, gems and yellow coloured grains
on you. Yes, now you have approached the throne. OH MY GOD! WHAT’S
HAPPENING? It looks like a bad omen. A very inauspicious sign, Your
Excellency! A lady with her hair let lose stands between you and the throne,
Your Excellency.

“NO.” She shouts at you and blocks your ascension. You push away the lady. Oh
My God! Why is this smoke covering my vision at this crucial time? I am unable
to see anything, Your Excellency.”

“Come on! Come on! Please look again. Tell me what is happening there?”

“Please pardon me, Prince. A screen of smoke has covered everything.”

“At least find out who that woman is. Have you seen her earlier?”

“Your Excellency the lady has vanished into smoke. The hall, the throne, the
bejewelled crown everything has vanished. I think there’s somebody living in
this palace who knows magic. Someone who has got some occult powers. And
that someone has cast a spell and has blocked my vision, Your Excellency. Oh
My God! I feel a burning sensation all over my face.”

Vandhiya Thevan covered his face with both his hands. He remained in that state
for some time and then slowly opened his eyes.

Madhuranthakan’s face had gone red with uncontrollable anger. His eyes seemed
like burning coals. Even Vandhiya Thevan was afraid to see him. Did he fan the
desires in the mind of the Prince? He was assailed by feelings of guilt.

“Come on. Look again! A little more careful. Tell me who that lady is?”

“I can’t, Your Excellency. Once a scene vanishes from my vision it won’t appear
again. It might come back after a few days. If you are interested I’ll look at the
lamp again and see if any other scene is visible.”

“Come on fast! Tell me whatever you see.”

“People are confused. They are sad. They are furious. A messenger comes on a
horse back. Someone belonging to the Royal household has drowned in the sea.
The messenger is carrying is tragic news to the people.

“Oh My God! The people are so furious that they try to attack the messenger,

Your Excellency. If something like that happens don’t go anywhere near the
people. You will have to be very careful.”

“Who drowned in the sea? Did the messenger tell any name?”

“I cannot hear the name in the noise. And the scene has vanished, Your
Excellency.”

“Now there’s another scene. I see a group of scary people. They wear garlands
made of human skulls. Should be the Kapaalikas or the Kalamukas. One of them
is wielding a sword. There’s an altar before him, Your Excellency. And here also
I see a Prince. The Kaalamukas dance around the Prince. My God! Your
Excellency, never ever go anywhere near that kind of a crowd.”

Madhuranthakan was obviously frightened by this description. Vandhiya Thevan
saw beads of sweat appearing on his face.

“I am sorry, Your Excellency. I can’t see anything now. I feel dizzy. I can’t see.
Somebody is blocking my vision. Let me do this some other time at some other
place far away from here.”

Vandhiya Thevan held his head in his hands.

A Palace guard walked in to tell the Prince that his mother wanted to see him.

Madhuranthakan decided to pour all his pent-up anger on his mother. He started
to leave.

“Your Excellency, I can’t bear my headache. Please let me go around the city to
breathe fresh air.”

Madhuranthakan grunted his consent.

Life seemed quite fascinating to Pinaakapaani Pundit, son of the Chief Doctor of
Pazhaiyaarai. Sometime ago he was contented to learn the science of medicine
from his father. Vandhiya Thevan had spoken a lot about the outside world when
they were travelling together to Kodikkarai from Pazhaiyaarai.

Those who had fallen in love would have the urge to talk about it to somebody.
Vandhiya Thevan found out that the Chief Doctor’s son was a dunce and more to
entertain himself he started lecturing him on the dangers of falling in love. He
also told Pinaakapaani that he had fallen in love with a woman and went on to
explain the pain and the pleasure he had been experiencing because of his love.

At first the Doctor’s son hated talking about love. But slowly his mind changed.
He became jealous of Vandhiya Thevan. And he was quite furious over him too.
He asked the name and the whereabouts of Vandhiya Thevan’s beloved.
Vandhiya Thevan bluntly refused to share that information. Pinaakapaani
became even more furious. By the time they reached Kodikkarai, Vandhiya
Thevan had become his avowed enemy.

The flame of love that Vandhiya Thevan had kindled in his mind started to burn
bright when he first set his eyes on Poonkuzhali. Poonkuzhali not only rejected

his love but also insulted him with her sharp words. And when Pinaakapaani
knew that Poonkuzhali respected Vandhiya Thevan more than him, he was mad
at her and even more jealous of the Prince of Vallam. And he went to the extent
of betraying Vandhiya Thevan to Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men.

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men could not arrest Vandhiya Thevan. Instead they captured
Pinaakapaani and returned to Thanjavur. And Pinaakapaani was imprisoned for a
while. That fuelled the fire of enmity in his heart. He now wanted to take
revenge on Vandhiya Thevan at any cost.

Of course Pinaakapani was set free by Nandini even before Princess Kunthavai
went to the underground dungeons to see him. That was a brilliant move by
Nandini.

Nandini felt let down by Vandhiya Thevan for he had escaped from Thanjavur
Palace without taking leave of her. She suspected the bona fides of the Prince of
Vallam.

When she knew that Vandhiya Thevan went to Pazhaiyaarai from Thanjavur and
from there went to Srilanka, her doubts were confirmed. She knew very well that
one day or the other Vandhiya Thevan would return to Pazhaiyaarai to see the
Princess. Nandini needed a reliable source at Pazhaiyaarai to find out about
Vandhiya Thevan and send a message to him.

She talked to the Doctor’s son and found him suitable for the assignment.

“Listen. The person who betrayed you will soon return to Pazhaiyaarai. Watch
out. When he comes you will have to trail him and find out where he goes and

what he says. And then send message to me. And if you do that, I’ll load you
with gifts.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar also gave a similar assignment to the Doctor’s son.

“If you capture that Traitor and hand him over to us I’ll give you a job in our
Spies Regiment. You’ll be elevated to a high rank quite soon.”

Pinaakapaani lost interest in medicine. He had started building castles in the air.
He was roaming the streets of Pazhaiyaarai hoping to find Vandhiya Thevan.

He looked at everybody with suspicious eyes. He would run up to somebody
walking on the street and look pointedly at his face. ‘No, he’s not the one’ He
would mumble to himself before walking away. Many people thought that the
Doctor’s son had lost his mind.

Pinaakapaani persisted in his efforts.

When Prince Madhuranthakan and his retinue entered Pazhaiyaarai,
Pinaakapaani did not care to look in the crowd for Vandhiya Thevan, for he did
not expect to see Vandhiya Thevan in that crowd. He was wandering around the
palanquin that was carrying the young saint Thirunaaraiyur Nambi.

But when the person riding on the horse near Madhuranthakan’s chariot turned
to look at him, Pinaakapaani became suspicious.

The retinue soon disappeared into the massive Palace. Pinaakapaani did not have
a chance to confirm his suspicion.

Chapter 19: Timely Rescue

So long as the Thirunaaraiyur Saint was in Queen Mother’s court accepting her
hospitality, Pinaakapaani, the Doctor’s son, could not get in. He was standing at
the gate along with a crowd and was peering to see what was happening inside.
There was another person who was witnessing the drama unfolding before him
without making his presence too obvious - Azhwarkkadian alias Thirumalai.

Vandhiya Thevan’s attention was elsewhere. Pinaakapaani’s eyes were glued on
Vandhiya Thevan.

After the Royal Court was dissolved Vandhiya Thevan did some ‘sooth saying’
for Prince Madhuranthakan which only served to increase his frenzy. His
mission accomplished, Vandhiya Thevan strolled out of his lodgings.

The Doctor’s son was waiting precisely for that moment. He came near
Vandhiya Thevan and asked him, “Who are you, Man?”

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked on seeing Pinaakapaani. But he cleverly hid his
feelings and said in a nonchalant tone. “Pardon?”

“I asked, ‘Who are you?’”

“Who am I? You ask me. Which ‘I’ are you referring to? Is it this body made of
the five basic elements – earth, water, fire, air and space? Or are you referring to

the Atma which is the very basis of life? Or the Paramatma which is the very
basis of Atma? What a funny question, Man? There is neither me nor you.
Everything is God. This world, the one we see with our eyes is an illusion. You
should go to some saint like the great Thirunaaraiyur Nambi who visited our
Court and learn about the true nature of this body, God and our attachments.”

Vandhiya Thevan did not give a chance to Pinaakapani to respond to him. He
jumped on his horse and rode fast out of the palace complex. He slowed down
only when he was sure that Pinaakapaani was not on his trail.

But the Doctor’s son was not to be so easily deceived. In fact Vandhiya Thevan’s
clever reply only confirmed his doubts. He went to the officer in charge of town
security and told him about Vandhiya Thevan. Pinaakapaani along with the two
guards deputed by the Officer was going around the town looking for the Prince
of Vallam. And as he expected he saw Vandhiya Thevan at a four-road junction.

“This man is a spy! Arrest him!” Pinaakapaani shouted.

“Are you mad?” Vandhiya Thevan shouted back.

Now Pinaakapaani had the chance to repay Vandhiya Thevan in his own coin.

“Who is mad? This body or the life within it or the Atma that supports the life or
the Paramatma that supports the Atma? Does the quality of madness refer to the
jeevan, the Eswara or the attachment?”

“With this blabbering you confirm that you have gone nuts.”

“I am not mad. I am the Doctor who travelled with you to Kodikkarai. Guards,
this man is the spy who escaped from the Thanjavur Fort and went on an
espionage mission to Srilanka. Arrest him! Right now!”

The guards went near Vandhya Thevan.

“BEWARE! Don’t be fooled by this man’s words. I am part of Prince
Madhuranthakan’s retinue. I am his official soothsayer.”

“NO! Not at all! He is a great liar. Arrest him, I say!” Pinaakapaani shouted.

A big crowd gathered around them. Some of them supported Vandhiya Thevan
while others were on Pinaakapaani’s side.

“He doesn’t look like a soothsayer.” Said a person in the crowd.

“Nor does he look like a spy.”

“Can a soothsayer be so young?”

“Why not? Do you think a spy would ride on a horse on the streets of the city in

broad daylight?”

“Why should a soothsayer have a knife on him?”

“Ok. If he’s a spy then tell me whom does he work for? And why has he come to
Pazhaiyaarai?”

It was at that point of time that Pinaakapaani committed a tactical blunder. He
shouted as if he were possessed.

“Come on, arrest him! Arrest him immediately! It’s Pazhuvettaraiyar’s orders!”

The moment the crowd heard the word Pazhuvettaraiyar their sympathies went
to Vandhiya Thevan. Everyone started thinking of ways to make him escape
from the clutches of Pazhuvettaraiyars.

Meanwhile Azhwarkkadian walked into the crowd.

“I am looking for the soothsayer who came with Prince Madhuranthakan. Is he
here?” – He shouted.

“NO! NO! THIS MAN IS A SPY!”

“What’s this new devil? Hey man, if you are the soothsayer who came with
Prince Madhuranthakan then come with me. Princess Kunthavai wants to see
you.”

Vandhiya Thevan’s heart leapt in joy.

“Yes, I am the one. I am coming with you.”

“NO DON’T LEAVE HIM. HE IS THE SPY. HE IS THE SPY.”

Pinaakapaani was now shouting like a really mad man.

Azhwarkkadian spoke to Vandhiya Thevan in a stern voice.

“First prove yourself. Show me that you are a soothsayer. Only then you can
come with me.”

And he winked his eyes at the Prince of Vallam without anybody else noticing.

“What kind of proof do you want?” Vandhiya Thevan was desperate.

“Do you see those two horses coming afar? The riders are apparently carrying
some important news. Can you tell us about it?”

Vandhiya Thevan looked at the horse riders.

“Why not? A person belonging to the Royal household has met with an accident
in water. They are bearing that sad news.”

Before Vandhiya Thevan finished the sentence the horse riders approached the
crowd. They had to stop because the crowd blocked their way.

“You look like messengers. What news are you bringing to us?”

Azhwarkkadian asked the horse riders.

“Yes we are messengers. We are bearing sad news. Our Prince
Arulmozhivarman’s ship was caught in the whirlwind. The Prince was drowned
when he attempted to save somebody.”

When one of the horse-riders broke the news people started to wail and scream.
‘OH MY GOD!’

Everyone was crying. Nobody knew how so many people gathered in that place
in such a short time. There were men, women, old people and children. They
surrounded the messengers. Some started asking questions while others were
crying aloud.

Many people in Pazhaiyaarai knew that the Pazhuvettaraiyars did not like Prince
Arulmozhivarman. They also knew that the Pazhuvettaraiyars had sent men to
Srilanka to arrest the Prince. They first started murmuring their displeasure over
Pazhuvettaraiyars. After a while they started openly cursing them.

“Pazhuvettaraiyars are surely behind this one. It was not an accident. The
Pazhuvettaraiyars have killed Prince Arulmozhivarman.” They were talking
among themselves

The sound of people talking, their sobbing and crying and the sound of their
cursing the Pazhuvettaraiyar brothers resembled the roar of a turbulent ocean.

The messengers from Thanjavur were caught in the midst of the crowd and
could not proceed further. They tried to move the people away but to no avail.

“How?” “When?” “Are you sure?” – People started questioning the messengers
who could not move out of the crowd.

Azhwarkkadian now addressed the guards who had come with the Doctor’s son.

“Why are you standing here doing nothing? Come on. Clear the way for the
messengers. Move the crowd. And get the messengers to the Palace.”

Even those guards were shattered by the news. They came forward to make way
for the messengers. The messengers now started to ride slowly towards the
Palace. The crowd followed them. As time passed, the crowd swelled in size.

While the entire crowd was devastated on knowing the fate of Arulmozhivarman
only one soul was screaming.

“Don’t believe them. This is a trick to rescue the spy. Don’t fall for it.”

Pinaakapaani’s cries were completely ignored by the crowd. Like a twig caught
in the gushing water of a river Pinaakapaani was also carried along with the
crowd.

Even as the crowd started to grow, Vandhiya Thevan had gotten down from the
horse. When the crowd started to move, Azhwarkkadian came near him and
firmly held his hand and whispered into his ears.

“Leave the horse. Let’s get it later. Come with me.”

“Oh My God! That was a timely help. But for you..... .. . I dread to think what
would have happened to me.”

“Now that has become your habit. You get caught by your rashness. And
someone has to come to your help every time.”

The two stood on the side of the street letting the crowd to pass. When the crowd
cleared, Azhwarkkadian held Vandhiya Thevan’s hand and led him in the
opposite direction. They entered the street full of Palaces. They walked into a
palace in the corner which was locked. They entered the garden in the back yard

of that Palace. And started walking through the trees and creepers. Soon they
saw the bluish water of a canal. There was a boat. A beautiful woman was on the
boat. Vandhiya Thevan’s heart skipped a beat when he saw her.

Chapter 20: The Mother And The Son

Prince Madhuranthakan went to see his mother. The old woman, the Queen
Mother Sembian MaDevi, was widely acclaimed by the people of the Empire for
her devotion to Lord Shiva. Once upon a time, Madhuranthakan too worshipped
his mother. But of late, the blind devotion had degenerated into a blind rage. He
had never heard of a mother who spoke against her own son and as if that was
not enough, spoke for his cousins and rivals.

‘Of all the people in the world, why should I have a mother like her?’

But on that day, seeing a rare kind of peace on his mother’s face, he was a little
mollified. Sticking to the tradition he prostrated at his mother’s feet.

“May the eternal wealth of devotion to Lord Shiva multiply!” The pious lady
blessed her only son.

She made him sit on a comfortable seat. The words she had chosen to bless only
hurt him, for it denied him the throne.

“Madhuranthaka, is my daughter-in-law doing fine? Are your in-laws doing
well? I hope the Chancellor and his family are doing well too.”

“Yes, everybody is fine. But why do you bother at all?” –

Madhuranthakan was curt. But he murmured and thankfully his mother did not
hear him.

“Did you see the Emperor before leaving Thanjavur? How is his health?”

“Yes, I did see him in person and took his leave before coming here. His health
is deteriorating every day. The pain in his mind is much more than the pain in his
body.”

“What is the cause of the Emperor’s agony, dear?”

“It’s the law of nature that those who are unfair, those who are guilty and those
who have stolen others belongings are bound to suffer.”

“What are you talking? What crime did our Emperor do?”

“What else but sitting on the throne which rightfully belongs to me? Is it not a
crime? Is it not an injustice?”

“My dear son, your mind was as white as milk. I don’t know how it was
poisoned. Tell me who planted these ideas in your mind.”

There was more of compassion and feelings of hurt in the Queen Mother’s voice

than anything else.

“No one has given wrong ideas to me. What makes you think that your son is a
perfect idiot? Do you by any chance suspect that he has a mind of his own? And
is capable of thinking like other reasonable men?”

“Even great geniuses could be spoilt by wrong advice. As the saying goes, even
a stone can be dissolved by the right person with time and effort. And have you
forgotten our epic Ramayana? Even the mind of the great Empress Kaikeyi was
spoilt by the wrong advice from Kooni.”

“Yes. I know that women’s mind can be spoilt by wrong advice.”

“Whom are you alluding to, Madhuranthaka?”

“Let it go. Tell me, Ma, why did you send for me?”

“Weren’t you present during the festivities at the Royal Court this morning?”

“Yes, I was Ma. You brought some faceless boy wandering in the street to the
Palace in a palanquin. And you made him sit on a throne and treated him like a
King. I am sure his feelings of pride would have swollen to an unimaginable
extent.”

“Oh My God! Please don’t talk ill of him, my son. He might be young in age.

But he is a saint. A holy mind fully matured in devotion to Lord Shiva.”

“Ok, Ma, let him be a saint. So what? Even if I were to talk ill of a real saint his
glory is not going to be diminished. And I did not even object to the Royal
courtesies you extended to that boy. But first tell me, Ma, why did you call me?”

The Queen Mother let out a long sigh. And then spoke in a sad voice.

“I am shocked by the way you have changed over the years. I never thought even
in my wildest dreams that a two-year stay in the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s Palace would
have changed you this much. I have a duty to do now. I have to deliver on the
promise I made to your late father. My dear son, before we discuss the reason for
which I called you here, you should know my story, especially how I married
your father. Will you please give a patient hearing?”

Madhuranthakan communicated his assent by his body language - by placing his
hands firmly on the seat handle and making himself comfortable in his seat.

“You have visited my native village Mazhapaadi once or twice, when you were
an infant. You have also seen Lord Shiva’s temple there. I have heard that the
temple is one of the sixty four temples built by the great Chozha King Ko
Chengatchozhan. My father, that is your grandfather, was a big name in
Mazhapaadi. Our clan is quite ancient.

At one time the Mazhavaraiyars were highly influential Chieftains of the Chozha
Empire. During the reign of Vijayaalaya Chozha, the Mazhavaraiyars were
aligned with the Pandyas. So when the Chozhas won the battle with the Pandyas,
our clan lost its power and influence. When I was a small girl I was not

concerned with all those things.

My heart was with the Dancing Lord, Lord Nataraja of Mazhapaadi. When I was
a child, an elderly man told me about the historical incident connected with
Mazhapaadi.

The great saint Sundaramurthy Nayanar was once walking across our town.
There was a dense growth of Konrai trees around the Mazhapaadi temple hiding
its view. The great Saint walked past the temple without even noticing it.

He then heard a distinct voice calling him, ‘Sundara, have you forgotten me?’

Sundarar looked around. He asked his disciples whether they talked to him. They
said they did not. They said that they did not hear any voice. The Saint enquired
the local people whether any Shiva temple was around. And then he discovered
the famous Mazhapaadi temple hidden behind the dense growth of Konrai trees.

He ran into the temple like a mad man and sang his famous song ‘Ponnar
Meniyane’ (The one whose body is of the golden hue) in a state of ecstasy. Ever
since I heard the story, the immortal lines of the Saint - ‘My Lord, the most
precious of all the gems, the shining ruby of Mazhapaadi, My father, whom shall
I think of, but you!’ were stuck in my memory. I used to go to the temple quite
often. I would stand before the idol of Lord Nataraja and chant those lines. As
years passed, the Mazhapaadi Lord had fully entered my heart. I thought I would
marry only my Lord and nobody else. I thought of myself as Shiva’s consort –
Uma, Parvathi or Dhakshayani. I closed my eyes and started doing penance to
have the Lord as my husband, in the same way those consorts of the Lord did.
And if somebody broached the subject of my marriage, I used to become furious.
As I grew into a maiden, my love for my Lord became so intense that the town’s
people called me, ‘pichi’ – a mad woman. I was least bothered. I spent almost all

my waking hours in the temple. I used to gather different kinds of flowers make
them into garlands and adorn my Lord with them. I used to close my eyes and
meditate on my Lord for long hours.

One day, as I was deeply engrossed in my meditation, I heard some sound and
woke up startled.

About five or six people were standing before me. My heart went to the person
who was standing in the forefront. I was sure that Lord Shiva, on whom I have
been meditating for ages, had now come in person along with his retinue to take
me to his home.

I stood up and then prostrated before him. He must have seen the copious tears
flowing out of my eyes.

“Who’s this lady? Why is she crying?”

A voice thundered.

“She is my daughter. And she is fond of Lord Shiva. She spends all the time in
the temple thinking only of the Lord. She sits in meditation, does penance and
sings songs shedding tears all the time.”

I heard my father’s words as well.

When I looked at that man, I knew that he was not the Lord but somebody from
the Royal household. I was shy and I ran till I reached my home.

But the person, who won me over, did not leave me alone. Soon he came to my
house along with my father. My dear son, you should know that the person was
none other than my dear husband and your father, the late lamented
Kandaraathitha Chozhar.”

The Queen mother paused. The old memories had brought fresh tears in her
eyes. She wiped her tears and resumed the narration.

“And then I came to know about your father. He had ascended the Chozha
Throne only recently. Ever since he came to power, he had been visiting various
temples of Lord Shiva. He was about forty years old at that time. He had married
quite young and his first wife had died early. He did not have the heart to marry
again. But he changed his mind on seeing me. He asked my hand in the presence
of my father. To me, he appeared as my Lord Shiva Himself who had taken a
human form exclusively for me. I gave my consent to the marriage. We were
married soon. And thanks to the marriage, your grandfather regained the lost
influence and the honorific title ‘Mazhavaraiyar’

“When we were married, your father and I had an open talk and made some
important decisions. We decided to dedicate the rest of our lives to the service of
Lord Shiva. And we had also decided not to have any children. There was an
important reason for that. I never thought a day would come where I would be
explaining that to you. But now the need has arisen, and I don’t want to hold
back anything from you my dear son. Please listen.”

The Queen mother sighed again. Madhuranthakan listened with rapt attention.

Chapter 21: Are You A Mother?

The Queen Mother continued to talk:

“My dear son, when your father Kandaraathithar ascended the Chozha throne the
Empire was in the throes of a crisis. You know about the glorious times of your
grandfather Emperor Paranthaka. During his reign the Chozha Empire extended
up to Srilanka in the South and up to River Krishna in the North. But towards his
last days the Chozha Empire and the Chozha clan went into bad times. The
armies of the Twin Provinces from up north, which were as powerful as the army
of the demon King Ravana, invaded our Empire.

The first born of Emperor Paranthaka, your uncle and the one and only
Rajadithya Chozhan went to the war front to face the massive army of the Twin
Provinces. At a place called Thakkolam in the north a war as ferocious as the
famous Kurushektra war of the Mahabharata war was fought. Hundreds of
thousands of soldiers were killed in the war. The invading army was crushed and
its soldiers scattered away. Unfortunately your uncle Rajadithya Chozhan was
killed in the battle. His younger brother Arinchaya Chozhan was badly injured in
the battle. But at that time we did not have any information about him. The only
member of the Royal family who was with Emperor Paranthaka was your father.

But your father kept himself away from the affairs of the Government. He was
devoted to Lord Shiva. He hated wars. Why should the innocent people be
butchered to feed the ambitions of the Kings, had been his view of war. He
frequently argued with his father and his brothers. He was on pilgrimage most of
the time and spent almost all his life in the company of saints and holy men.

He never had the heart to touch a sword or any other weapon designed to kill
people. He never let himself be trained in the ways of war or military strategy.
He believed that politics was after all a euphemism for lies, deceit, conspiracy
and heinous sins like murder. ‘What is the difference between a thief stealing
somebody’s possessions and a king invading another country?’ he argued.

“My dear son, it was by a strange quirk of fate that a person with such a saintly
attitude had to bear the Kingly responsibilities. Your grandfather was devastated
by the death of his son Rajadithya and the dangers faced by the State at that
time. As he was about to die he called your father and said, “Son, its time you
take over as the King.”

Your father did not want to displease the dying Emperor. He accepted. His first
wife, the blessed woman Veeranarayani Devi, was dead at that time. And he had
not met me yet. So your grandfather was naturally worried about the future of
the Chozha Empire after your father’s time. Luckily those who went to Lanka in
search of your uncle’s son, Sundara Chozhan, found him there and brought him
home.

Emperor Paranthaka was fond of his grandson Sundara Chozhan. He was the one
who virtually brought him up. And many elders had predicted that the Chozha
Empire would regain its past glory during the reign of Sundara Chozhan.

This made your grandfather love his pet grandson more. When your father was
crowned as the King your grandfather insisted that Sundara Chozhan be made
the Crown Prince and that after your father only Sundara Chozhan and his
children should rule the country. That was in fact the last wish of your
grandfather. He died soon after the coronation of your father.

Your father did not hide anything from me. He was particularly anxious to

honour the last wishes of your grandfather. He did not want any stumbling
blocks on the way of Sundara Chozhan becoming a King after his time.

Your father was not keen on ruling the country. He was not interested in politics.
He was devoted to Lord Shiva He was a blessed soul.

His heart was constantly dwelling on the lotus feet of the Dancing Lord,
Nataraja. Therefore he entrusted the affairs of governance to his brother
Arinchaya Chozhan and his son, Sundara Chozhan. His interest lay only in
serving Lord Shiva.

As I told you earlier he did not have any idea of marrying again. But I came into
the scene probably to weaken his determination. He was interested in me for the
only reason that I was devoted to Lord Shiva and was known locally as ‘pichi’,
the crazy woman. I am indeed fortunate to have him as my dear husband. I
should have done penance in my previous births for otherwise I would not have
been blessed with such a nice husband. And you are fortunate to have him as
your father.

Only very few saints have had the blessing of seeing Lord Shiva in person. The
great Lord appeared before your father in person and took him to His abode. In
the same way I see you with my worldly eyes, your father saw the Lord. And we
have a bounden duty to fulfil the wishes of such a blessed being.”

When the Queen Mother paused her son’s body was shivering in anger His mind
was boiling.

“What are you saying, Ma? My father never told me about all these things. How

can I be bound by his words, Ma?”

“Listen to me, son. When your father attained the lotus feet of Lord Shiva you
were but a child. So he could not discuss these things with you. He did not hide
anything from me and sought my help to honour the commitment he had given
to your grandfather. When we were married we had first decided not to have any
children. But being weak as I was I could not hold on to that decision. The
devotion I had for Lord Shiva blossomed into love for your father. In due course
my heart longed for a child. I wanted to hold a child close to my heart and
smother him with my love. When I saw other women fondling their children my
heart burnt with desire. I prayed to my Lord who was kind enough to indulge
this crazy woman. He gave you to me.

A part of me was dancing in joy because I begot you; but another part of me was
afraid that your father might be furious with me. But that great man did not take
it amiss. Instead he burdened my shoulders with the great responsibility of
honouring his commitment.

“Son, I have given word to your father that I will bring you up as a man devoted
to Lord Shiva; not as somebody trying to fish in the murky waters of dirty
politics. And till some time ago I believed that I have honoured your father’s
commitment.

“My dear son, the one who is dearer to me than my life, my darling, of late I
have been hearing some disturbing things about you. And I am deeply hurt. Will
you please deny all those rumours and heal the wounds of my heart, my
dearest?”

The Queen Mother was pleading.

“Ma, I too am hurt deeply by your words. Tell me, Ma, what do you want from
me?”

Madhuranthakan was furious.

“My dear child, I think you have lost the powers to divine what’s there in my
mind. And that drives me to the unpleasant task of openly declaring my
thoughts. Listen. I hear that your mind has strayed far away from the Ganges of
devotion to Lord Shiva and has fallen into the murky sewage of worldly desires.
I hear that you are now desirous of ascending the Chozha throne. I learn that our
enemies have poisoned your mind. I’ll be at peace only if you strongly deny
these rumours.”

Prince Madhuranthakan rose from his seat. Seeing his excited state his mother
also followed suit.

“The enemies have not poisoned my mind. Are they our enemies, Ma, those who
want to crown me as the King? Are they our enemies, Ma, those who are ready
to lay down their lives for me? No. Do you know who my worst enemy is? You,
Ma. The one who begotten me is my worst enemy.”

Madhuranthakan forgot even the basic courtesies he owed his mother. His fatherin-law, the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had drilled into his head to somehow change
his mother’s mind by talking softly to her. He threw that good advice to winds
and started heaping abuses on his poor, widowed mother.

“I repeat: you are my worst enemy. Nobody else is. Are you a mother? Are you a
woman? Mothers of this world will give their life for their children’s well-being
and prosperity. I have heard stories of those mothers. I have seen such mothers
in real life as well. But I am wondering whether you, whose nature is
diametrically different from that of a loving mother, are a human being? Or are
you a demoness in human form?

What wrong did I do to you? Why do you punish me like this? Why are you
keen on betraying me? Why do you want to snatch the Kingdom that is rightfully
mine and give it to somebody else? You say that it is my father’s last wish. You
say that you have given your word to him. Where’s the proof? Who is the
witness? No, I don’t believe you, Ma.

You say that I am spoilt by the words of those around me. But it is you who are
spoilt by wrong advice. Your advisors have done a brilliant job of turning a
mother against her own son. Listen. I’ll never give up the Chozha Throne which
lawfully belongs to me. I won’t give up even if you ask me to do so. Why you,
even if my dead father were to rise from his grave and ask me to give up my
claim, I won’t. This Chozha Empire is mine. Its ancient throne belongs to me.
The crown worn by the famous Karikal Peruvalathan is rightfully mine. I’ll get it
one day. The rosary beads that I am wearing now were given by you. I have been
wearing them because of the respect I had for you till now. I am going to throw
away this necklace of beads which has made me powerless and a laughing stock
before the people of this country. Ma, I am doing that right now. It’s for you to
keep.”

Madhuranthakan talked as if he were possessed by some evil spirits. And then he
tried to take off the necklace of beads from his neck. He could not do that. He
tried to cut the string off. But he only ended in hurting his neck. The necklace
was there in its place.

Madhuranthakan was a very handsome man. In a way he was more handsome

than the two sons of Sundara Chozhan. There was an added feminine grace in
his face which was absent in the faces of the Emperor’s sons. That beautiful face
had turned ugly in anger and loathing. His mother Sembian Madevi could not
bear to see her only son’s face. She closed her eyes.

She opened her eyes only when her son was done with his outbursts. Her voice
was as soft as ever. “Calm down, my son. Let me be a cruel demoness. Even
then be a little patient and listen to my words.”

Madhuranthakan was a little pacified.

“I’ll, Ma. I’ll definitely listen. When have I refused to listen to you, Ma?”
Madhuranthakan was still emotionally charged.

“You talked about a mother’s nature. Even if a mother were a cruel demoness
she’d never hurt her child or betray him. Even the animals of the forest try to
save their young ones from predators. I too am in a similar position doing my
best to save you from danger. There is another compelling reason, my son that
you should not covet this Kingdom. You will be putting your life to a great risk
if you desire for the throne. What’s wrong in a mother wanting her child to have
a long life, my son?

If you covet the post of the King you will become an enemy of the Emperor’s
sons. Adithya Karikalan and Arulmozhivarman are great warriors. You are never
used to handling weapons. The entire army of Chozhas will support the
Emperor’s sons. The Generals too will support them. They have friends in the
neighbouring countries as well. Who will help you? Who will be on your side if
you fight against those people?

You must be aware of the comet appearing in the skies of late. You know that it
is a very bad omen especially for Kings and rulers. That’s known throughout the
world. I don’t want you to risk your life in these troubled times. I am anxious to
protect my only son from all dangers. Tell me, my dear son, is that asking for too
much? Is that wrong? Is that a betrayal?”

These words softened the mind of Madhuranthakan.

“Please forgive me, Ma. You should have told me right in the beginning that my
well-being is your only anxiety. I would have dispelled your fears. Ma, I am not
friendless. I am not alone. The most powerful Chieftains and high Government
officials are on my side. The Pazhuvettaraiyar brothers are on my side.
Kadambur Sambuvarayar is supporting me. Your dear brother and my uncle,
Mazhavaraiyar, are on my side. Neela Thangaraiyar, the Twin-Parasol
Rajaaliyar, the great landlord of Kunrathur have pledged their unconditional
support to me. They have promised to be on my side and are ready to lay down
their lives for me.”

“My dear son, I don’t believe in the emotional promises given by these people.
Once upon a time these same people promised their unconditional support to
Sundara Chozhan and his offspring. They have not thought twice to break their
promises. And what prevents them from doing the same thing to you?”

Ok, let’s for a moment assume that these people will be true to you till the end.
Don’t you know that the army at their disposal is quite small? A huge part of the
Chozha Army is up North under the control of the Crown Prince Adithya
Karikalan. Another large part is in the South under the control of the
Kodumbalur Chieftain.”

“Ma, the Chieftains who are on my side can at any time mobilise ten thousand

soldiers per head.”

“Ok, let’s forget the army. What about the people? You know very well that the
people love the sons of Sundara Chozhan. You saw it with your own eyes today.
If Adithya Karikalan or Arulmozhivarman had visited Pazhaiyaarai instead of
you, the whole city would have gathered to welcome them. Yes, the people loved
you. In the past. Ever since you became related to the Pazhuvettaraiyar family
they have started hating you.”

“Ma, I am not bothered about the people. They are meant to be ruled. They have
a duty to be true and faithful to the occupant of the throne. That’s all.”

“My dear son, your advisors have not even taught you the rudiments of politics
and statesmanship. No King can sit in the throne for long without the love and
affection of people. And there is no point whatsoever in ruling a people who do
not like you.”

They heard a huge noise outside the Palace. They could hear people wailing,
screaming, shouting in anger, cursing and shouting. And the voices came from a
thousand mouths and resembled the roar of an ocean when a hurricane passes
over it.

“Son, the Chozha Empire is about to face a huge calamity. The first signs of the
calamity are visible now. Let me go out to find the reason for the noise. You stay
here till I come back.”

Chapter 22: “What’s That Noise?”

As soon as Vandhiya Thevan came near the canal, he recognised the beautiful
woman on the boat - Princess Kunthavai. He wanted to rush to the boat. He
restrained himself and stood beside Azhwarkkadian.

“What are you waiting for, Young Man? The Princess has been waiting for a
long time. Get into the boat. Fast. Tell her that the Prince has come and that he is
safe. Do not waste her time by bragging about your acts of bravery. I have to go
now. We have today unleashed the riot-devil on the streets of Pazhaiyaarai. Let
me see whether there is any chance of putting it into the cage again. See, what
kind of nuisance you have created for us with your foolhardy acts to exhibit your
bravery?”

Azhwarkkadian left the place. Vandhiya Thevan was surprised.

How does this man know everything? He never asked about my work or my
problems. Is it mere guesswork? Does he really know? I have heard about the
two types of ascetics – the first one is hereditary and for the second asceticism is
just a means of livelihood. Perhaps the same classification applies to spies as
well. I became a spy by sheer force of necessity. That is why I land myself into
trouble quite often. This man is a Vaishnavite. And yet it looks like espionage
runs in his blood. Without getting excited this man always gets his things done.
But whom does he work for? He has told a lot about himself. But did he tell the
truth? The whole of it?

Submerged in thoughts about Azhwarkkadian, Vandhiya Thevan reached the
banks of the canal. He saw Princess Kunthavai sitting on the boat. He saw her

beautiful face. At that very moment, he forgot about Azhwarkkadian. He forgot
his mission. He forgot the world. He forgot himself.

‘Oh My God! I was never away from the beautiful face of this woman. Not even
for a second. This face came with me in dreams, in my waking state, when I was
caught in the whirlwind, at the hills, in the forest, in the middle of the sea...
everywhere. But surprise of surprises! Whenever I see her in person, the beauty
of this woman appears highly enhanced. Why do I feel that lump in my throat
and an excitement in my heart?

Vandhiya Thevan stepped into the water and walked unconsciously towards the
boat. As soon as he got into the boat, Kunthavai signalled to the deaf boatman.
The boat started to move. Vandhiya Thevan’s heart started to dance.

“Oh Soothsayer! Do you have a policy of serving only the Princes? Won’t you
predict my future? How are you going to do that? Will you look at the planets
and stars to know about my future? Or base your predictions on crows and
sparrows? Or the lines on my hand? I think you’ll see my face and tell the future.
Otherwise, why should you be staring at my face for so long? If you do that to
your customers high society women will never come a mile near you.”

Kunthavai’s words appeared as the sweetest music to Vandhiya Thevan’s ears.

“Your Highness, I was not looking at your face for soothsaying. I was wondering
that I had seen this face somewhere earlier. I am trying to remember. That’s all.”

“I know. I know that you are forgetful. Let me jog your memory. You met me for
the first time about forty days ago at the house of the Kudanthai astrologer. Then

on the same day you saw me at the banks of Arasalaaru River.”

“Stop it, Your Excellency. I can’t believe your words. Did I see you only forty
days ago? No way, Your Highness. Didn’t I see your face forty thousand years
ago? Haven’t I seen your face a hundred thousand times in the hundreds and
hundreds of our previous births? Haven’t I seen you at the foot of the
mountains? Haven’t I seen you at the top of the summit? Haven’t I see you near
the canal? Haven’t I seen you running away from a ferocious tiger in a dense
forest? And didn’t I kill the tiger and save you? At that time, I was a hunter
roaming in the forests.

I caught many parrots with colourful feathers in my net. I gave them all to you.
And you just let them fly away and laughed at me. Oh, the sound of your laugh
was music to my ears. At another time, I was an angler. I went to the far off
rivers and canals and brought home beautiful fish of golden and silver colours.
You got them all from me and then let them back into the water. And were
pleased to see them swimming happily in water. I went to the far-off seas and
dove deep into the water holding my breath for a long time to bring out pearls
and corals. You felt them with your hands. You then called the young boys and
girls in the town and filled up their small hands with those precious gems. I went
to an apricot tree that was three hundred years old. Waited for its sweet fruits
which will appear only once in thirty years. Then I plucked the fruit and offered
it to you. You gave it to your pet parrot and were pleased to see the bird relishing
the sweetest fruit on earth.

I went to the celestial world and brought home the divine manthara flowers for
you, Your Excellency. You told me ‘They are no match to the jasmine flowers
that blossom in my backyard every night’ I went to the celestial world again
begged the chief of gods, the Devendra to give his necklace made of rare rubies.

‘No, I won’t even touch the jewel worn by the immoral Devendra’ you rejected
that as well.

Then I went back to do penance before Parvathi Devi, Lord Shiva’s consort. And
as the fruit of penance, I got her beautiful anklets for you. I showed them to you
and offered to place it on your leg myself.

“Oh My God! How can my feet touch the Holy Mother’s anklets? It’s a heinous
sin. Give it back to the Holy Mother.” You shouted at me.

I then went to war and vanquished the kings of all the sixty-four nations of the
world. I collected their crowns and made them as an offering at your feet. You
just kicked them away. I was not concerned about the tumbling crowns; I was
worried that the act might have hurt your feet which are as soft as the lotus
flowers.

“Your Excellency, I don’t know what is the truth, whatever I said so far, or what
you said, that we met only forty days ago and have not seen each other earlier. “

It appeared as if he had not finished his talking.

“Devi, there’s another sweet memory. Once we were on a silver boat rowing
with ivory oars with golden handles. We were sailing in the sky rowing over the
moon-like waves of the ether.”

“Oh My God! The soothsayer has become mad. I think we may have to steer the
boat back to the banks.”

“No, Your Excellency. My mind was as clear as a crystal until I reached the
banks of this canal. For otherwise I could not have found a way to enter this
highly guarded Pazhaiyaarai city. How could I have posed as a soothsayer to
Prince Madhuranthakan, made him believe it and come to your Palace as part of
his retinue? Or how could I have escaped so easily from the Doctor’s son? But
the moment I got into the boat and saw your face I lost my mind, intoxicated by
your beauty.”

“Then don’t look at my face. Look at the waters of this canal. At the clear blue
sky. The tall trees on the banks. The beautiful alcoves of the Pazhaiyaarai Palace.
The marble steps that lead to the canal. The Ambal and Senkazhuneer flowers in
full blossom. Or at least look at the face of this deaf boatman.

And answer my questions.

“Tell me what happened to the work I gave you. Were you successful or not?
Have you brought the Prince here? How is he? Where have you left him? With
whom have you left him? And then tell me everything that happened ever since
you left this place.”

“Your Excellency if I had not successfully completed the work you gave me I
would not have come here to show my face to you. I have brought the Prince
from Lanka. I met a thousand hurdles on my way and cleared them all. But I
can’t say that the Prince is doing well. When I left him, he was suffering from a
rare type of fever. But I have left him in safe hands. I have left him with the
boat-girl Poonkuzhali and the flower-boy, Chendan Amudhan. They are ready to
give their lives a hundred thousand times to save the life of the Prince.”

They heard a confusing noise from a distance. It was a collective wail coming
from a thousand mouths. Vandhiya Thevan and the Princess looked in the

direction of the sound. Their faces exhibited fear and concern.

“What is this noise? Looks like an angry mob.”

“Yes, Your Excellency. I also think so.”

Chapter 23: Vanathi

If talented poets were to choose a metaphor for the beauty of Kodumbalur
Princess Vanathi they would chosen twilight evening”. . As the day ends, as the
sun starts to set in the West and the light fades a vague sense of grief pervades
our mind. Paradoxically the grief comes with a strange kind of calm happiness.
As the last rays of sun fall behind the mountains in the west, the world is bathed
in darkness. Darkness invariably wearies the mind forcing us to look above for
hope. And then everything changes. Within the time it takes us to wink our eyes
the Sky-Goddess lights a million lamps, the twinkling stars. Those tiny
flickering lamps never fail to fill our minds with happiness. Unlike the scorching
rays of the sun that always hurt our eyes, starlight, though feeble, is pleasant and
cool. We can see the light with our naked eyes - a luxurious pleasure which the
Sun can never provide.

As an added bonus the moon also rises in the sky, well, our day, or rather our
night is full. What more do we want from the Sky Goddess? The world gently
trembles in ecstasy by the pearly rays of the moon. Our heart enthusiastically
takes part in the universal dance of happiness.

It is true that the lotus flower folds its petals into itself and goes to sleep. But as
if to match the light coming from the stars, the jasmine buds burst open into fully
blossomed flowers intoxicating the sky and the earth with their fragrance.

It is true that after sunset the happy singing of the birds fades into silence. But
the sound of the bells and the music produced by the Nadhaswaram coming from
the temple in the yonder soothes our auditory nerves. When the soft hands of the
women pluck the strings of Veena and Yaazh the soul-stirring music emanating
from these stringed instruments transports us to heaven.

There will surely be consensus in the voice of the poets when they compare the
beauty of the Kodumbalur Princess Vanathi to the fading lights of a pleasant
evening – a heady concoction made out of the shining colours of happiness and
laced with some vague grief to complete the taste.

Vanathi’s nature- like her beauty swung from one extreme to another in no time.
At one time she would be stoic like Savithri and Chandramathi the famous griefstricken characters of our lore. At another she will be so completely immersed in
joy that the bystander might compare her to the angels of the celestial word
Ramba and Urvasi – singing and dancing all day without any care or worry.

She would be like the famous dancer Madhavi happily bound in Kovalan’s love
for some time; then she would look exactly like the grief-stricken Kannaki who
lost her husband to Madhavi.

There were times where she played the role of the mythological character Valli
smitten by her love for Lord Muruga and eternally longing for his company.
There were also times she would resemble Deivanai, Lord Muruga’s other
consort, who married him with the entire celestial world dancing in happiness.
Vanathi would be the working definition of the word ‘bliss’ during those times.

Vanathi could remain without even the faintest resemblance of a smile on her
face for days, weeks and months. There would also be days when she would be
laughing non-stop all day. When she laughed, the sound waves would make the
environment go mad with happiness and excitement.

There were genetic and environmental reasons for her extreme mood swings.
When she was in her mother’s womb her father, the Kodumbalur Chieftain, was

fighting many horrible wars. Alternating news of his victories and defeats would
come to his pregnant wife. Her mother would be dejected or delighted depending
on the latest news that had arrived from the war-front...

A few years after Vanathi was born her mother died. Her father showered all his
love on her. This phase did not last long. However, the Chieftain could not
ignore the clarion call for war. Even his only daughter could not stop him from
going to the battlefield.

When Veerapandiyan, the Pandya King, fled from the battle, Vanathi’s father
headed a regiment that went to Srilanka to destroy those who supported the
Pandyas in their campaign against the Chozhas. He lost his life there in Lanka
earning for him the honorific title ‘The Junior Velar Who Fell In Lanka’.

Vanathi was inconsolable for the only reason her grief was incomparable. Only
those girls, who had lost their mothers early in life and then lost their only
parent, their dear father, could understand the state of her mind. Of course, she
still grew up in the Kodumbalur Palace in royal luxury; but no one could fill up
the place of her dead father.

The elders of the Palace consoled Vanathi. One consolation was quite different
from the rest.

“Don’t grieve, my child. Your father will be born as your son. And as your son
he’d do great things and make you a proud mother.”

These words somehow stuck. They never went out of her memory. Vanathi tried
to assuage the feelings of grief caused by her father’s sudden death thinking

about her unborn son.

‘How will my son look like? How will he walk? How will he talk? How will he
sit? How valiant will he be?’

Vanathi would try to figure out the answers for these questions living in a world
of fantasy and imagination all day. She dreamt of her son going to distant lands
and winning great wars there. She also saw him returning to his native land to
place his victories at his mother’s feet. She saw him wearing the bejewelled
crown sitting on a grand throne. She saw the Kings and Emperors coming from
near and far to pay their tributes to him waiting at his feet. She saw the people
bursting into noisy happiness when they saw his face in the same way the sea
becomes turbulently happy on seeing the Full Moon.

He saw him leading hundreds of ships to faraway countries that lied beyond the
distant seas and emerging victorious in his encounters there.

She also heard him saying to her quite often, “Mother dear, I owe all my
victories, my honour and glory to you.”

The innocent girl would at times touch her small abdomen, which was beautiful
in the shape of a tender banyan leaf. ‘Has my son come in already?’ She would
muse. The women of Tamilnadu had listened to the stories from Mahabharatha.
They also knew how Kunti Devi, the mother of Pandavas, begot them.

Vanathi would lose herself in imagination. ‘Which god will bless me with a
child?’ At that time, she did not think of marrying anybody. When she came of
age and knew the birds and bees story for the first time she realised that, she had

to marry a man if she wanted a child. Even then, her imagination was more
about the child than about its father.

After she shifted to the Pazhaiyaarai Palace, a major change happened in her life
and her attitude. Kunthavai’s majestic love was a source of happiness and solace.
Kunthavai’s dress, her speech, her modern outlook transported Vanathi to a
different world, a world she never knew existed. There were many girls like her
in the Palace – daughters of petty kings and chieftains brought in to provide
company to Kunthavai. Those girls were jealous of Vanathi. Their jealousy filled
Vanathi’s mind with hopes for a new life. Her intuition told her that she had
something, which they did not have. At the same time, her sweet manners and
friendly disposition endeared her to everyone in the Palace. Even the new palace
life, the love of the Princess and the jealousy of other girls could not stop her
dreaming about her unborn son.

It was during this juncture that she met Ponniyin Selvan for the first time.
Paradoxically all her dreams were shattered on seeing the handsome prince. Yes,
she had now grown up and she knew that she could not get a son without the
help of her husband.

How to control my wicked mind, thought Vanathi. For it had gone completely to
Prince Arulmozhivarman, the darling of the people of the Chozha Empire. The
Emperors of the fifty-six countries of the world were begging him to accept their
daughter as his wife. Yet Vanathi’s mind had gone to him. She was hopelessly in
love.

‘Will the Prince ever deign to look at me? How can I even dream of winning his
hand? Once the mind has gone to the Prince, how can I marry any other man?
And if I don’t marry, how can beget a son? Which means only one thing: all my
dreams of having a valiant son who will rule over the world are shattered.

She was afraid that her heart might burst unable to bear the pain of these
thoughts. She was immersed in grief once again. Princess Kunthavai who could
read Vanathi’s mind showered her love on her. She was with her all the time. She
tried her best to enthuse the poor girl. She made her understand that it was not
her fault to have fallen for Ponniyin Selvan. Nor was it an impossible dream.

It was at this time they met the Kudanthai Astrologer. His prediction about
Vanathi’s son fanned her desires. Her dream castle began to grow in size now.
Vanathi was now alternating quickly between grief and ecstasy. She could bear
neither the pain of longing, nor the prospect of great joy. When the two emotions
reached their extremes Vanathi invariably fainted. Vanathi survived only because
of the release mechanism of fainting, which Nature had gifted her.

While Vanathi was at Thanjavur, she saw the play on the life of Emperor
Paranthaka. The distress call she heard in the Palace on the same night and the
scary scene she saw in the Emperor’s bedroom had shaken her. It was only on
that day she learnt the depth of enmity between her Kodumbalur clan and the
ever-strong Pazhuvur clan. She also came to know the power and influence
enjoyed by the Pazhuvettaraiyars.

‘Will the Pazhuvettaraiyars let me marry the Prince? Even if they did, will the
women of their household tolerate the union? Will the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur
let it happen? Whenever I think of Nandini, why does the figure of a beautiful
cobra come into my mind? I know Nandini hates Kunthavai. There is every
reason that hatred may be directed to me as well. Who knows, that poisonous
reptile might even sting Ponniyin Selvan.

Didn’t I see Nandini’s form in the sick Emperor’s bedroom? But was it Nandini
or somebody else? Why should the great Emperor make such a distress call?
Why does Princess Kunthavai refuse to discuss that with me? Of late, the
Princess has changed a lot. She does not talk in that happy carefree way which
she used to do earlier. Quite often, she leaves me and seeks solitude. Something

is eating her insides. Perhaps she too is afraid of the safety of her younger
brother, Ponniyin Selvan. Perhaps that is the reason she does not want to discuss
that with me.

Even today, Princess Kunthavai disappeared mysteriously. If she is away these
girls raise hell. Oh My God! What a revelry they make! They are least bothered
about what is happening to the outside world or to the Royal family. They should
be happy. That is their only mission here in the palace.

Even in normal times, Vanathi found it difficult to bear their sarcastic
insinuations. During the last three days, Vanathi was submerged in the sea of
grief. Every word uttered by those girls hurt her like a sharp needle.

Ignoring the girls, she went in search of Princess Kunthavai. She heard that the
Queen Mother has convened a court in her Palace. She went there to see the
Princess. When she reached the Palace, she found that the court had already been
dissolved. She learnt that the Queen Mother and her son Prince Madhuranthakan
were closeted in their chambers for a personal talk. For no known reason this
piece of information disturbed her.

She left the place. She heard the ruckus at the gates of the palace. She could not
guess the reason. She wanted to see Princess Kunthavai at once. She started
enquiring every maid regarding the whereabouts of the Princess. They told her
that the Princess was holding a secret discussion with the Vaishnavite fanatic
Azhwarkkadian a little while ago and afterwards had gone towards the canal at
the backyard of the palace.

Vanathi knew that Kunthavai did not like to be disturbed. Not even by Vanathi.

She was in a dilemma – should she go in search of the Princess now? At that
time, a girl called Vaarini came running to Vanathi.

“Ponniyin Selvan is dead” – Vaarini broke into a wail while sharing the terrible
news with her friends. The other girls started to cry and scream. Vanathi, at first,
did not feel anything. Vanathi froze. The other girls looked at her.

“Unlucky Devil! The Prince lost his life only because of your ill-luck.” Vanathi
felt that all the eyes staring at her were repeating these words. Vanathi could not
bear that implicit charge. Nor could she stand in that place. She ran towards the
canal at the backyard of the palace.

As she was running, her mind was in a state of turbulence. Only then, she
understood the full import of the words “Ponniyin Selvan is dead.” There was
another thought in her mind beyond the shock created by the sudden death news
of her beloved.

For the last few days whenever Vanathi had a strange experience. She would
stand on the canal-bank and would see the Prince’s handsome face in water.
Whenever she tried to touch that face, it would vanish. She now knew the
meaning of that omen.

‘When the Prince was drowning he was thinking of me. He even called me.
Without knowing what is happening, I was staring at his face like a heartless
devil. Oh My God! I have sinned! There is no point in crying now. What should I
do now?’

Her mind now seemed to have a life of its own.

“Crazy girl! Should you at all think on what you should do? What is there to
think? The canal at the backyard goes all the way to Arasalaaru River.
Arasalaaru then goes all the way to the sea.

“The Prince is waiting for me at the bottom of the sea. He is waiting for me to
join him. He is inside the palace built of pearls and gems. What else do I have to
do other than going there as fast as possible?

Why should I be here?

Vanathi had decided. Her mind was filled with a strange kind of peace. Her
anguish subsided. Her grief went away. Her sorrow evaporated. She went
straight to the banks of the canal. She got down through the marble steps. She
stood on the last step for a while. She could see a boat coming at a distance.

She recognised the Princess sitting on the boat.

Who is that man sitting with her? He appears to be the young man whom we met
at Kudanthai Astrologer’s house. Yes, he was the one who went to Srilanka as the
Princess’ messenger. Perhaps he was the one who has now brought the news of
death of the Prince. Princess Kunthavai has taken him aside to know the details
about the death of her brother. She will hide the details from me. She is perhaps
afraid that I may not have the strength to listen to the gory details. That was why
she left me here and went alone with that messenger.

If the Princess comes back then she will not let me have my way. She will try to

pacify me. She will console me. She will prevent my being with my beloved. Is it
fair to go away without taking leave of her?

Didn’t she love this orphan? Should I not thank her at least?

No. I can’t do that. I can’t wait even for a second more. Here, I see his face in the
water. No, I see his whole form. He is calling me. He is smiling at me.

“Come dear. There is nothing to stop our union now. Come to me now, my
dearest”

Why do I delay? Why do I feel so very dizzy? Why do I feel like swooning? Let
me swoon. It doesn’t matter so long as I fall in the water and not on the shore.’

Vanathi’s desire was fulfilled. She fell into water. Her body which hitherto
simmering with grief- was cooled immediately. Her heart, which had become red
hot in unbearable love, had now become as cool as ice. She was gradually going
down. Deeper and deeper. She did not know how far she went. Nor could she
guess how long she had been going down. It could be a few seconds or several
centuries.

She had reached the world of fantasy at the bottom of the sea. Perhaps this is the
Naga Loka eulogised by the mythology. Oh My God! How many beautiful
palaces are there! How many floors in each of them! Once could never see
where the palace ended. Why is the light so cool and pleasant here?

Because the light rays are coming through the medium of cool water, they are
also cool. But wait, what is the source of light? Yes, it is coming from the walls of
the Palaces. Well that is not strange. Palaces built by gold, pearls, diamonds and
by the mythological diamonds carried by the deadliest of snakes are likely to
emit this kind of cool light.

What is that crowd coming over there? Their bodies are radiating light. Oh My
God! The glow in their faces is beyond words. These people appear to be
celestial beings. Perhaps I have not come to the Naga Loka, but to the celestial
world of devas.

What followed resembled a dream, happening inside a dream. They took Vanathi
to a large, lavishly decorated hall. Ponniyin Selvan was standing in the middle of
the hall and welcomed Vanathi with a seductive smile on his golden face.
Celestial conches started playing. Flowers and gems were thrown on them.
Amidst the sound of auspicious music, the Prince and Vanathi exchanged
garlands and became man and wife.

Unable to bear the happiness Vanathi fainted. She remained unconscious for a
long time. Then two hands lifted her. She first thought that the hands belonged to
Ponniyin Selvan.

She naively thought that the Prince was lifting her, hugging her and then making
her lie on his lap and was trying to restore her consciousness. When she felt
bangles on the hands that lifted her, she was suspicious.

“Vanathi! Vanathi! Why did you do that?”

Even the voice was feminine. Vanathi strained herself a lot and opened her eyes
a little. She saw Kunthavai’s face very close to hers.

“Akka! Akka! Is that you? Did you come for my wedding? I could not see you.”

Chapter 24: Vanathi Revived

Vanathi lost her consciousness again. Her eyes remained closed even when her
consciousness gradually started returning to her. She knew that her marriage to
the Prince, whether solemnised in the land of snakes or that of celestial beings,
was only a hallucination. She remembered hearing the death-news of the Prince,
and then standing near the canal, her head becoming dizzy and finally her falling
into the canal.

These memories made her sad and disappointed. The deadly spear of grief
pierced her soft heart. She tried to open her eyes, but could not. Who could have
saved me? - She thought.

Must be Princess Kunthavai. Why should the Princess save me? Why didn’t she
let me die? As soon as I am able to open my eyes, I am going to fight with her.
Does she not love her younger brother? Then why did she prevent me from
joining him in the other world?

I can hear the Princess talking to somebody. Who is it? What is she saying?

“Poor soul! She is in a semi-conscious state. Her words are incoherent. Thank
God, she is saved. If our boat was a little away or if we had not noticed her
falling into the canal…..Oh My God! I can’t even begin to think of that... “

“It could have been better that way, Your Excellency. The girl’s life would have
ended on a good note. Now that you have saved her I hate to think of the grief
she has to endure in her life.”

Who is this person? The man has so much of care and concern for me. Yes, he is
the same young man whom we met in the Kudanthai Astrologer’s place and later
on the banks of River Arasalaaru. Perhaps he brought the Prince’s death-news. I
am dying to know what else these people are going to discuss. Even though I
can’t open my eyes, I can hear every word they speak.

“Why are you so heartless? Perhaps as a rule, men are heartless. And you are no
exception.”

Yes, it was the voice of the Princess.

“What did I do to merit those stinging words from Your Excellency?”

“Didn’t you say it would have been better if she died? What more do you require
to show that you are heartless? Do you know how I am struggling to bring her
up?”

“Did you listen to her?”

“What did you hear?”

“I think she said something about marrying the Prince.”

“Yes, she did; when she was not fully conscious. You will know how deep her
love has gone into her being.”

“That’s not good for the girl. She is going to be disappointed.”

“What makes you say that? Is there any woman in this world more suitable to
the Prince than this girl? Haven’t you heard about the great Kodumbalur Clan of
warriors? They are a great family and have a hoary tradition.”

“Yes, I have, Your Excellency. I am thinking of something and you are telling
about something else. However great may be her clan her love is bound to fail.”

“No, her love will win. Marrying the Prince is not just a dream in her mind. It is
my plan for the Prince too. It is my will and my vision. No, it’s the decision I
have already taken.”

“Even then it won’t happen, Your Excellency.”

“What makes you say that? Didn’t you say that the Prince is safe in the
Choodamani Buddhist Monastery in Nagapattinam? I am sure you spoke the
truth.”

Oh My God! Happy news at last! Is my beloved safe? Is he in Choodamani
Monastery in Nagapattinam? My ears must have blessed to hear this news! It is
good that I did not die when I fell into this canal. I will have to thank the
Princess. I am already indebted to her. This has made me bound to her forever.

What does this man say? His words fall like molten lead into my ears.

“Your Excellency, it’s true that the Prince is safe. But what is the assurance that
he will accept this girl’s love? I think the Prince will not marry this girl.”

“You may think whatever you like. If there is one person in the whole world who
will not go against my words, if there’s one person to whom my word is divine
law, it’s my younger brother Arulmozhivarman.”

“Princess, please include me in that list.”

“Then what do I lack? What is there to prevent my dream from coming true? Do
you think the Pazhuvettaraiyars will come in the way?”

“I don’t know. Having known them, I do not even want to venture a guess. I
know that the Prince loves you very much. I know he will never go against your
word. He is not interested in being a King or ruling an Empire. I was present
when he refused to be crowned as the Emperor of Srilanka. If you insist, I am
sure he will even accept to be the King. But to marry this girl. ..... “

“Do you think he will refuse? What grounds can he possibly have to reject this
beautiful angel? And tell me what makes you say so?”

“Your Excellency, this girl is perfect. Flawless. Even if I were to find a flaw in
her, I won’t believe my eyes. To me even the lowliest of maids working for the

Princess is an angel. The hare that lives in your garden is to me the majestic
Iravatham, the mythological white elephant, the preferred vehicle of Devendra,
the Chief of gods.

Yes, this girl is flawless. But there is a chance that Prince’s heart is lost to some
other woman.”

Oh My God! How cruel! Why is this young man keen on piercing my wounded
heart with the mighty spear of his words?

Meanwhile the Princess responded in a majestic tone.

“Warrior of The Vana Clan, I don’t understand. Why are you keen on defaming
my brother?”

“This is no defamation, Your Excellency, but plain, hard truth, which I saw with
my own eyes and heard with my own ears.”

“Go ahead. I am now strong enough to hear anything, however painful it may
be.”

“Didn’t I tell you about the boat-girl, Poonkuzhali? She is the one who took me
to Srilanka on her small boat. She is the one who saved the Prince and me from
the sea. She is the one who has taken the Prince to the Choodamani Monastery. I
would not have entrusted the Prince to the care of Chendhan Amudhan if he
were alone. I trusted them with the life of the Prince because Poonkuzhali was

there. If that girl, Poonkuzhali, had a thousand lives she will not think twice to
lay down all of them for the Prince.”

“So what? She is still a boat-girl. How can she dream about marrying an
Emperor? How can the little sparrow which hops on the ground hope to soar in
the high skies along with the Eagle?”

“Why not, Your Excellency? The sparrow can look up to the Eagle. And the
Eagle can look down and still fall in love with the sparrow.”

“I will give my life to drive away those thoughts in my brother’s mind. I have
saved him from many dangers. I will also save him from the net of seduction
cast by a boat-girl.”

“Oh, is a boat-girl that cheap? Is one’s status and family so very important? Let
me tell you something, Your Excellency. The blood that runs in the boat-girl’s
body is also red. It isn’t black. Her heart also beats in the same way as that of
Prince Arulmozhivarman who was born and brought up in a grand palace.
Perhaps the love of princesses will be tainted with some ulterior motives – they
might want to be a queen, to rule a land... But the boat girl’s love is pure. Holy.
Sacred. Flawless. Perfect. The Prince also believes that. Now let us take my
case. If only I could open up my heart and show who is there in it... “

“NO! NO! Don’t do it. Whatever is there in your heart let it be there. They are
safe inside. That way it is good for all of us. Love, desire, compassion, all these
are okay for ordinary people. Not for those born in a King’s family. Not for those
who are born to rule the world. They will have to marry only those who hail
from a Royal family. They should never let their mind wander elsewhere. If they
do, their whole life would be an unending story of grief and sorrow. You need
not go far in search of proof. The best proof is my father himself. When he was

young, when he never hoped that he would be crowned as a King one day, he fell
in love with a girl living in a forest... But why am I saying all these to you?

“See this girl is regaining her consciousness. I can see her eyelids move. Don’t
you have any other story to tell? Didn’t you say that you met several dangers in
Srilanka? Tell me about them.”

“Yes, Your Excellency. On the day when the Prince refused the Lankan Throne,
as we were walking down the streets of Anuradhapura, suddenly, the front
portion of a building collapsed. If only we had delayed by a second, the debris
would have fallen on our heads crushing us to death. A woman saved the life of
our Prince. I don’t know who she is. But it seemed that the Prince knew her. She
is an old woman...”

“How old?”

“Old enough to be Prince’s mother. She is deaf and dumb.”

“Come on, say it again.”

“She is born deaf and dumb. Should be forty five years old.”

“Please tell me something more about her. Do you know about her birth and
upbringing? Where was she born?”

“In an island near Lanka.”

Princess Kunthavai’s excitement was beyond all measure.

“How does she look like?”

“Your Excellency, there’s something quite surprising about her appearance. I
don’t know how to put it across to you.”

“I am dying to hear.”

“She strongly resembles a lady I have seen here in the Chozha Empire. The only
difference is that she is old whereas this woman in our Empire is young. The old
woman was not dressed up. Her hair had been let loose. Otherwise the face, the
appearance, everything is identical. For a minute I mistook her for the other
woman.”

“Who is the lady here who resembles that old woman?”

“Can’t you guess, Your Excellency?”

“Is it me? This girl Vanathi? Or my mother in the Palace?”

“None of these.”

“Is it the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur, Nandini?”

“Yes.”

“Oh My God! My suspicion has become true.”

“What did you suspect, Your Excellency?”

“I thought Nandini is more deadly than the most poisonous snake and hated her.
I also suspected that she could be my stepsister. Now I know it is true. Cruel are
the ways of destiny! This only shows how wrong it is for a member of a Royal
family to marry somebody who does not belong to a reputed family or a famous
clan.”

“Your Excellency, I am not like that. I belong to a reputed family and come from
a famous clan. My ancestors have been ruling Tamilnadu for more than three
hundred years. At one time, my forebears imprisoned all the three great Kings of
Tamilnadu – the Cheras, the Chozhas and the Pandyas. I may not have any
kingdom today. But I have a sword in my hand, strength in my shoulders and
courage in my heart.”

“I’ll hear about your past glory later. I have many things to do now. Will you
help in my future undertakings?”

“Help? Even if I have a thousand lives I’ll give them all for you.”

“Looks like you are the brother of that boat-girl, Poonkuzhali. You repeat the
same dialogue. Ok, let us not talk about her now. This girl is going to open her
eyes now.”

Vanathi was fully conscious now. Her body had come strong again. There were
several thoughts in her mind. She decided to stay alive at least to prove that her
love for the Prince was any day greater than the boat-girl’s love.

She remembered the scene she saw in the Emperor’s bedchambers. She
remembered the Emperor’s lamentation. She could now understand the meaning.

“How are you dear?”

“I am fine, Akka. I am embarrassed that I have put you to so much trouble.”

Before Kunthavai could respond, Azhwarkkadian entered the scene.

“I have also come here to trouble you, Your Excellency. There is an unruly mob
at the Palace gates. It is all confusion and chaos. People are furious about the
Prince’s death. Unless you can do something to pacify them I am afraid we are in
for a big trouble.”

Chapter 25: The Chief Minister’s Arrival

The streets of Pazhaiyaarai had never witnessed that kind of commotion in the
past. A large crowd was marching towards the Palace. The crowd consisted of
men, women, young, old and the children. There were Saivites, Vaishnavites,
Buddhists and Jains. Even the Kalamukas known for their gory austerities were
there. Most of the people were crying. All of them were cursing the
Pazhuvettaraiyars.

Young men were seen with thick sticks in their hands. They deliberately clashed
their sticks with those of others creating a rattling noise. Those who heard the
noise said, “That is the sound of the stick hitting the heads of the
Pazhuvettaraiyars.” Some were bold enough to utter these words aloud. Amongst
them, the gory Kalamukas were prominent.

The frontal elevation of the main palaces in Pazhaiyaarai was in the shape of a
crescent moon. There was a common front yard where the people gathered on all
festive occasions. The yard was large enough to hold thousands of people. It was
inside a high-rise compound wall. There were three gates along the wall; each of
them manned by a couple of security guards.

The crowd was assembling at the three gates and was swelling by the second.
The Palace Guards let in only the two messengers who brought the news of the
Prince and the local guards who came with them. They blocked the other people.
But they could not contain the crowd for long.

They could hear voices from the crowd - “Get in! Get in!” The guards could not
trace the owners of the voices. People shoved those who were standing before

them. Like the waves in the ocean pushing each other, people were pushing hard
to get in.

Those who were in the front could no longer hold on to the pressure from
behind. They pushed aside the guards and entered the front yard of the Palace. It
was like a small leak in the dam, which grew in size flooding the vicinity. The
entire crowd walked into the front yard which was soon packed to its full
capacity.

The conversation between the Queen Mother and her son Madhuranthakan was
interrupted by the ruckus at the gates of the Palace. She stopped the conversation
abruptly and walked towards the balcony.

When the crowd saw the divine looking Queen Mother folding her hands
reverentially towards them, the crowd became silent.

“Queen Mother, where is our Prince? Where is Ponniyin Selvan? Where is your
darling, Arulmozhivarman?”

The Queen Mother was shocked. She did not know anything. She could only
guess that Ponniyin Selvan, who had stolen the hearts of Pazhaiyaarai people, is
in danger. What was the danger? How did it happen? Did the Pazhuvettaraiyars
do something to cause a perennial stain on the Chozha Dynasty and
Madhuranthakan?

In the meanwhile the horsemen from Thanjavur somehow managed to reach the
forefront. The local guards who had accompanied them shouted to the Queen
Mother.

“Your Excellency, these people have brought an important message from
Thanjavur.”

The Queen Mother waved to silence the crowd. She then addressed the
messengers.

“What news have you brought us?”

“We are the most unlucky people in the world for we have brought very sad
news, Queen Mother. Prince Arulmozhivarman was returning from Lanka on the
orders of the Emperor. His ship was caught in a whirlwind. Another ship that
accompanied his, broke into two and was about to sink. Our Prince jumped into
the sea to rescue the sailors in that ship. He was not seen thereafter.
Arrangements have been made to look for the Prince along the entire coastline.
The Emperor and the Empress are devastated, Your Excellency. The Emperor
wants you and Madhuranthakan to come to Thanjavur immediately.”

As soon as the Queen Mother heard these words, her eyes opened up and tears
started flowing down her cheeks. People saw that and they cried more.

Those who were in the front of the crowd shouted,

“Queen Mother, we request you! We beg of you! Please do not go to Thanjavur.
Nor do we want Princess Kunthavai to go. Let us bring the Emperor here.”

“Ponniyin Selvan drowned in the sea! No, it’s a blatant lie. The
Pazhuvettaraiyars must have murdered him.” – shouted another man.

“Madhuranthakan also should not go to Thanjavur. Let him be here.” Another
voice was heard.

“Where is our Princess Kunthavai? We want to see her.” Many voices joined in
this request.

The Queen Mother sent one of the maids to bring the Princess.

Azhwarkkadian who was standing in the crowd moved away. He took the shortcut, walked fast and reached the place where Kunthavai was busy reviving
Vanathi who had fallen into the water. He heard the last few words spoken by the
Princess to Vandhiya Thevan. He suddenly appeared before them and explained
the situation.

The Princess left Vanathi to the care of other maids and hurried to the balcony of
the Palace. When she came near the Queen Mother she noticed the tears in the
latter’s eyes. And that made her to cry too. The people cried more.

“Ponniyin Selvan did not die by drowning. The Pazhuvettaraiyars killed him. We
should take revenge.”

“The Emperor is imprisoned by the Pazhuvettaraiyars. We should first free him
and bring him back to Pazhaiyaarai. We are ready to march to Thanjavur if the

Princess gives orders.”

Kunthavai thought about the options before her. No, she could not say that the
Prince was alive. That would only compromise the safety of her dear brother. At
the same time the crowd has to be pacified. Otherwise the consequences could
be disastrous.

She wiped her tears and looked at the eyes of people standing in the forefront.
By that time Azhwarkkadian and Vandhiya Thevan had joined the crowds. The
Princess signalled to Azhwarkkadian to come up to the balcony. Azhwarkkadian
obeyed.

She whispered something into his ears.

He waved his hands requesting the crowd to be silent. And then he thundered in
a majestic voice.

“Even now the Princess cannot believe that Ponniyin Selvan would have died.
Once as a child when the Prince fell into river Cauvery, the river-goddess,
Mother Cauvery lifted the child from the water and saved him. She believes that
Samudrarajan would have done the same thing now. She asked the Soothsayer,
who also confirms her views. The Princess will make suitable arrangements to
find the Prince. Meanwhile she requests you to remain calm and leave the
Palace.”

The whole crowd heaved a sigh of relief.

“Where is the soothsayer? Let’s hear that good news from him once again.
Please.”

Vandhiya Thevan was precisely waiting for this opportunity. He reached the
balcony in no time. He stood near Azhwarkkadian and roared to the crowd.

“It’s true that there was a major threat to the Prince’s life. But he is alive. And
will return quite soon.”

“How do you know?” – There was a solitary voice of protest.

“I should know. I am a soothsayer. I studied the stars and planets and came to
know. I studied the omens and signs and found out the truth.”

“LIE. YOU ARE LYING. YOU ARE NOT A SOOTHSAYER. YOU ARE A
SPY.” The same voice now shouted at him.

Vandhiya Thevan looked at the owner of the voice. Yes, he was the Doctor’s son
who failed in his attempts earlier, to have Vandhiya Thevan arrested.

“Crazy fellow! Are you calling me a spy? Whose spy am I?”

“The Pazhuvettaraiyars.” The Doctor’s son, Pinaakapaani, now knew the trend
and blurted out the answer in the wink of an eye.

“What did you say?” Vandhiya Thevan roared.

The balcony was a clear twelve feet above the ground where the people were
standing. Vandhiya Thevan did not mind the height. He sprang on the Doctor’s
son from the balcony. And a fiery duel started. People loved watching a duel
whatever may be the circumstances. The entire crowd was now absorbed in the
fight. They stood around the two men in a circle.

Those standing in the balcony were watching the duel with real concern. Some
people in the crowd started shouting more, without even knowing what was
happening.

At this time, the sound of conch shells and horns were heard near the gates.

And the thundering voice of the herald echoed against the walls of the Palace.

“GIVE WAY FOR THE CHIEF MINISTER OF THE CHOZHA EMPIRE, HIS
EXCELLENCY ANIRUDDHA BRAHMARAYAR”

The crowd moved aside in reverence to let the Chief Minister pass through.

Chapter 26: The Chief Minister’s Prayer

The Chief Minister’s Palanquin pierced its way through the raging crowd.
People stepped aside to show their reverence to the Minister. Some expressed
their concern about the Prince. The Chief Minister himself appeared sad. He
lifted his hands as if to bless the people and console them. As soon as the
palanquin reached the entrance, it was gently lowered. The Chief Minister came
out of the palanquin and looked up.

He saw the Queen Mother and Princess Kunthavai standing in the balcony. He
bowed to them. Then he looked at the two men fighting.

Vandhiya Thevan and the Doctor’s son, Pinaakapaani, were engaged in a fierce
duel oblivious of the circumstances. Azhwarkkadian came running to the Chief
Minister and whispered something into his ears.

The Chief Minister barked orders to the guards who had accompanied him.

“Arrest these ruffians who have dared to fight right in the front yard of the
Palace. Right now!”

Azhwarkkadian also went along with the guards piercing through the crowd. The
fighters were arrested and handcuffed with leather straps. Azhwarkkadian
signalled to Vandhiya Thevan who gave himself up without any protest.

The Chief Minister then ran up to the balcony to address the people.

“I understand your grief and your fury. The Emperor and the Queens are in a
state of distress. I beg of you not to indulge in any act that might further
aggravate the Emperor’s grief. We have made issued orders to search for the
Prince along the coastline. Please disperse peacefully.”

“We want to see the Emperor. The Emperor should return to Pazhaiyaarai.” –
That was an angry voice from the crowd.

“What is the fate of our soldiers in Srilanka?” – That was another angry voice.

“The Emperor is safe in Thanjavur Palace. The Velakkara Force is now guarding
the Palace night and day. I will bring the Emperor to this city at the earliest
available opportunity. That is a promise. And you do not have to worry about our
soldiers in Srilanka. The war is over and we have won. Our soldiers will come
home soon.”

The words of the Chief Minister excited and enthused the crowd. They hailed the
Emperor and the Chief Minister and started to scatter away.

The Chief Minister then spoke to the Queen Mother:

“Your Excellency I need to discuss something very important with you. Can we
go into the Palace?”

He then turned to Princess Kunthavai: “I’ll come to you later.” Kunthavai left for
her quarters.

Kunthavai was worried. If at all there was one person in the whole Empire
whom Kunthavai feared, it was the Chief Minister. The man had the eyes of an
eagle. While his eyes would be judging the other person, his mind would
penetrate the other person’s mind and probe into his most secret desires and
intentions.

‘How much does he know? And what does he not know? What should I tell him
and what should I not? – The Princess was confused.

She was infuriated by the Chief Minister’s orders to arrest Vandhiya Thevan and
Pinaakapaani. She could not show her feelings. And she could not speak on
behalf of Vandhiya Thevan before the people of the city.

“I’ll come to you later.” Ok let him come. Let me give a piece of my mind. She
started walking fast towards her chambers.

Everyone in the Chozha Empire worshipped The Queen Mother Sembian
Madevi... Even the Chief Minister adored her. In spite of that, the pious woman
was deeply perturbed now. She waited for the Chief Minister to take his seat and
only then sat down.

“I have been devastated by the recent events. Have you brought any more bad
news now? Or have you come to console me?”

“Please forgive me, Your Excellency. I cannot answer your question. Yes, I have
brought some news for you. But whether it is good or bad depends on how you
look at it,” said the smart Minister.

“Is the news about Ponniyin Selvan true? I cannot believe my ears. We had great
hopes on him. We dreamt that he is born to bring the whole country under his
rule.”

“Queen Mother, you relayed the words of the astrologers to me. I have never
refuted your words. But nor did I accept them.”

“That’s ok. Is it true that the sea-God Samudraraja has taken his life?”

“Who can be sure, Your Excellency? Only one thing is sure. That the news has
spread through the whole country like wild fire.”

“If it’s true, what’s the fate of this Empire? What calamities will it lead to?”

“Your Excellency, calamities are not going to wait till the news is confirmed.”

“You are right. Even rumours are enough for them. I have never seen an angry
mob gate crashing into the Pazhaiyaarai Palace.”

“I don’t think this happened only in Pazhaiyaarai. Thanjavur is agitated as well.
The Velakkara Force refused to leave the Palace in the evening. People came in

thousands and laid siege to the palaces of Pazhuvettaraiyars. We had to let loose
the rogue elephants from the royal stable to disperse the militant mob.”

“Oh My God! That’s terrible news.”

“In a way it’s good that Madhuranthakan is in Pazhaiyaarai at this time.
Otherwise the blame would have fallen on him as well.”

“You will be surprised to know how my son has changed a lot during the recent
past.”

“I have been watching him. I know. I am not surprised.”

“I am surprised, Minister, that you didn’t take any effort to change his mind. Do
something at least now.”

“Your Excellency, I don’t think there’s a need to change his mind. I have come
here to change yours.”

“What do you mean?”

“Your Excellency, Madhuranthakan thinks that the Chozha throne belongs to
him. He wants to succeed the Emperor. I do not see anything wrong in it. It is a
just desire. And the desire has gone deep into his mind. No good will accrue to
the country by thwarting his desire. It’s better to go with him.”

“Oh My God! What happened to you? I never thought that, of all the persons,
you‘d betray the Emperor. The times are really, really bad.”

“Your Excellency I won’t betray the Emperor even in the wildest of my dreams.
I came here only on the orders of the Emperor. I am telling you what he wanted
me to tell you. You see, Madhuranthakan wants to ascend the throne after the
Emperor’s time. The Pazhuvettaraiyars are conspiring for that. But the Emperor
wants to crown Madhuranthakan and retire from active politics. He wants your
blessings.”

“The Emperor may want to do that. But it will never have my blessings. I will
never do something against the wishes of my late husband. Honourable Chief
Minister of the Great Chozha Empire, the very epitome of wisdom and
righteousness, even if the Emperor wishes to crown Madhuranthakan, how can
you endorse his views and carry the news to me? Have you forgotten the fact
that there are some deep secrets about the succession rights of the Chozha
Throne which only you and I know?”

“I have not forgotten, Your Excellency. I know certain things, which you do not
know, Queen Mother. That is the reason I accepted to be Emperor’s messenger
and undertook this crucial mission.”

“The whole world knows your intelligence and your astute political sense. Please
don’t use it on this timid woman.”

“Mother, I have not come to argue with you. Nor have I come to display my
political skills. I have come to you with a sincere prayer – to save the country
from great danger.”

“Pray to the Lord who has a crescent on his head. Or to your favourite God, the
Protector, Vishnu.”

“Yes, Your Excellency, if you do not help then only that Dancing Lord, Shiva
and the Sleeping Lord, Vishnu can save this country.”

“What danger does our country face now? And how can Madhuranthakan
becoming the King avert that danger?”

“Please listen, Your Excellency. Like what happened here today, the people of
the Empire from Kancheepuram to Rameswaram are going to rebel against the
Government. It will not stop with that. I learn that Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari is
coming back from Lanka with a great army. If the news reaches Adithya
Karikalan, he will not keep quiet. He will come with the Northern Army under
his command. His target will be Thanjavur. Meanwhile Pazhuvettaraiyars and
other Chieftains are gathering their own armies for the impending conflict.

Like the great Mahabharata war that happened between the Kauravas and
Pandavas, there will be a war in our Empire fought between brothers and
cousins, uncles and nephews. All your relatives, everyone who is near and dear
to you will be killed. Are you strong enough to watch the most pathetic battle
ever fought in the history of this great Empire?

“Oh My Dear Smart Minister! I do not have any relatives. Have you heard about
the great Saint Shankara who was born in the mountain-country in the West?
That saint has proclaimed,

“Parvathi Devi is my mother,
Lord Shiva, my father
His devotees are my relatives

That applies to me. I don’t have relatives in this world other than my Lord’s
devotees.”

“Your Excellency, I want to remind you of the fourth line in that song rendered
by Shankara. ‘Svadesho Bhuvana thrayam’ And I need not have to explain the
meaning to you. Our homeland is all the three worlds... Our country is our
world, Mother. And will you be silently watching your home country being
destroyed by civil war?”

“You are right, Minister. My country is dearer to me than all the three worlds.
But do you think that my country is this small patch of land we vaingloriously
call the great Chozha Empire? Never! My country extends up to Mount Kailas in
the North. If there is no place for me in the Chozha Empire, I will go to Varanasi.
I will go to Kashmir and Kailas. I have been thinking of that pilgrimage for quite
some time. And I need your help too.”

“Mother, I do agree that the vast stretch of land between Triconamalee in
Srilanka to Himalayas in the north is our country. This vast country called
Bharath is now facing great dangers by way of invasions from outside. The
Pathans, the Turks, the Mughals and the Arabs are now thirsting for new
countries and new lands. Like the Huns and the Romans who invaded us
thousands of years ago, people from this new religion are now arming
themselves to conquer Bharath. And their religion is quite strange, Your
Excellency. They think it is a holy act to demolish our temples and disfigure our
statues. And there are no great Samrats in the North who can block their
progress. I have been dreaming, Queen Mother, that our Chozha Warriors will go

beyond River Ganges up to Himalayas and establish a great empire. And that
perhaps is the only way to save this great country and its great temples.

I now seek your help in fulfilling my dream. I pray for your help to prevent
brothers and cousins fighting for the Chozha throne. “

The Queen Mother was lost in thought for a while.

“Dear Minister, you have confused the mind of this gullible lady with all those
information. If this sacred country has to face that kind of a threat then it is only
the prerogative of the Omnipotent Lord to do something about it. What can this
powerless, simple old woman do? I can never forget what my late husband told
me in his deathbed. And I won’t go against his wishes either.”

“Then, Your Excellency, I have no choice but to reveal the truth which you do
not know.”

Precisely at this moment, Prince Madhuranthakan made a noisy entrance into
that room.

He ignored the Chief Minister and spoke to his mother.

“Ma, is that true? I hear that Prince Arulmozhivarman is dead.”

The Chief Minister spoke to the Queen Mother.

“Your Excellency, please console your dear son. I wanted to tell you something,
which I will do some other time. May I be permitted to go now?”

He walked out the room in brisk steps.

Madhuranthakan waited for the Minister to go out and then blurted:

“See, this man is my first enemy. And he has come to give you wrong advice
even while I am here by your side.”

The Chief Minister heard the flippant words of the impulsive Prince even as he
crossed the doorway.

Chapter 27: Kunthavai’s Plight

The Chief Minister walked into Princess Kunthavai’s Palace. The Princess stood
up and folded her hands towards him.

“May you be blessed with a good and a valiant husband!”

“Is this the right time for that kind of a blessing, Sir?”

“Dear Princess, indulge this old man who just blurted out the blessing that came
to his mind. But what kind of blessing were you expecting, dear?”

“We are all deeply concerned about my father’s health. The whole country is
worried about what happened to Arulmozhivarman.”

“But I don’t see any sign of such grief on your beautiful face, dear.”

“I am born in a family of warriors. Do you want me to cry like an ordinary
woman when she encounters a calamity?”

“No, I will never ask you to do that. I only request you to please give solace to
those who lack that kind of courage – I mean those like me.”

“Acharya, who am I to console you? You, of all the persons in the world? Your
heart is made of the strongest diamond. Even if the whole world stops going
round you won’t be shaken, Acharya.”

“And you, my dear, can even shake a person like me. Women of the Royal
household should spend their time in dancing and singing. They should never
interfere in the governance of the nation. See what kind of havoc you have
caused by poking your nose into the political affairs!”

“Oh My God! That is a grave charge, Acharya. I will be grateful, Acharya, if you
can substantiate the charge.”

“I went to Srilanka only to advise Ponniyin Selvan to continue his stay in that
country. But you sent a message asking him to come home immediately. Once
you have ordered, do you think anybody will listen to this old man? Your action
has led us to this tragedy.The man who is the darling of the people of this Empire
is dead. Did you see the crowd revolting at the gates of your Palace? Similar
revolts are happening throughout the country. And you are the one who is
responsible for these revolts.”

“How do you say that Arulmozhivarman left Srilanka only on seeing my letter?
Don’t you know that the Pazhuvettaraiyars had sent two shiploads of men to
arrest him?”

“I know, dear, I know. If that had been the only reason then we could have held
the Pazhuvettaraiyars guilty. The ships they sent were destroyed. So they could
argue that the Prince left Lanka only because of your letter.”

“Acharya, how did you know that I sent a letter? And how did the
Pazhuvettaraiyars know?”

“Wonderful question, dear. The whole world knows. The messenger you sent
was first imprisoned by our army in Srilanka. So everyone in Lanka knows. The
Doctor’s son travelled with him till Kodikkarai. Through him, the whole country
knows. What you thought you were doing in secret is now known to the whole
world. That’s why I have been telling that women should keep away from
politics.”

Kunthavai was cornered. She was shocked. She did not know how to respond to
the charge. She could not deny the charge levelled against her by the clever
Chief Minister.

This thought made her furious over Vandhiya Thevan.

Yes, he was capable of great acts of chivalry. But that idiot could not guard a
secret. He has spoiled her name.If only she saw him again she would give him a
piece of her mind. Then she remembered that he had been arrested on the orders
of the Chief Minister.

Oh My God! He has the nasty habit of getting into trouble and embarrassing me
every time. Can’t he behave himself at least for a short time? Yes, the Doctor’s
son blabbered something. Why should the idiot jump from the balcony and start
a duel with him?

“Acharya, I have a prayer. Will you please listen?”

“Prayer? Command me, Devi. No one would dare to go against you in this
Chozha Empire.”

“When you came to the palace gates two men were fighting. And you had them
arrested.”

“Yes, Devi. Theirs was a grave offence. They were fighting right under the nose
of the Queen Mother in her own palace. That is unpardonable, Devi. That too at
what time? When the whole town was in a state of rebellion. Just imagine, Devi,
if some ignorant people had chosen to join that fight it would have been a
disaster. A spark of fire can destroy a whole forest. And this fight could have
sparked a nation-wide rebellion.”

“You are right, Acharya. What they did was a crime. Even then I beg of you to
release at least one of them.”

“Who’s the lucky man who has won the compassion of the Princess?”

“The messenger I sent to Srilanka.”

“Superb. That’s a blessing in disguise.”

“Why do you say that?”

“I wanted to arrest him myself.”

“Why did you want to arrest him? What did he do?”

“He has been charged with a grave offence, Devi.”

“What offence?”

“He killed Ponniyin Selvan by pushing him into the sea.”

“Oh My God! What harsh words! I can't bear them. Who’s accusing him?”

“Everyone, Devi. First, the Pallava Prince, Parthibendran who took
Arulmozhivarman in his ship. The Pazhuvettaraiyars are non-committal. ‘May
be’, is their stance. I too have my doubts.”

“Beware, Acharya! Are you questioning my intentions? Do you think that I sent
him to kill my own brother?”

“Never, my dear. You thought he could be trusted. Your trust could have been
misplaced. He could be the enemy’s spy which you might not have known.”

“No! Never! It can’t be. He was sent to me by Adithya Karikalan. My elder
brother wrote to me that this messenger can be trusted with any kind of
important work.”

“Even Adithya Karikalan might have been duped, Devi. Or the person might
have been good to start with. And could have been manipulated on the way. The
enemies could have recruited him to their side. Quite possible, Devi. I clearly
heard the word ‘spy’. The other man called him a spy. How do you explain that,
dear?”

“Acharya, the one who was standing in the balcony is the messenger sent by my
brother, Adithya Karikalan. He is from the Vana clan and his name is Vandhiya
Thevan. The person who was standing down is Pinaakapaani, the Doctor’s son.
Pinaakapaani accused Vandhiya Thevan as Pazhuvettaraiyar’s spy. What
foolishness!”

“How do you rule that out, dear?”

“It can never be. Remember he escaped from Pazhuvettaraiyars. They have been
sending scores of men to capture him.”

“How did he get the signet ring of the Pazhuvur family?”

“That devil, that witch, that venomous snake – pardon me Acharya for my
language – the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur gave the signet ring to him.”

“I am happy that you know it. If I had told that to you, you would not have
believed me. Yes, he is not Pazhuvettaraiyar’s spy. But he could be Nandini’s
spy.”

“How is that possible, Acharya?”

“I’ll explain. Vandhiya Thevan met Nandini in her palanquin outside the
Thanjavur palace. He got the signet ring from her at that time. Then using that
ring he met her at her chambers. Nandini hid him in the underground treasury
and then sent him out. She knew very well that he was carrying a message for
you. After he came back from Srilanka, they met again at the ruined Pandya
Palace at the banks of Harischandra River. Even after that meeting, the signet
ring remains with Vandhiya Thevan. How do you explain that dear? Do you still
believe in him?”

Kunthavai’s mind was perplexed.

Chapter 28: Spying The Spy

Kunthavai heard the charges levelled against Vandhiya Thevan.

“Devi, why are you silent? Do you still believe him?” – asked the Chief
Minister.

“I don’t have anything to say, Honourable Chief Minister. If you talk to me for a
few more minutes, I will even start doubting my own intentions. You are capable
of that, Acharya.”

“What can I do, my girl? We live in hard times. To believe somebody or not has
become the toughest decision of our lives. We are surrounded by enemies. Many
conspiracies are being hatched behind our backs.”

“Even then I think there is nothing you do not know, Acharya. How did you
gather so many details about the messenger I sent to Lanka?”

“Oh, dear! I have a thousand eyes and two thousand ears. They are spread all
over the country. My men are there even in the dreaded Pazhuvur Palace. One of
the personal bodyguards of the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur is my spy. And there
are many like Azhwarkkadian who go from place to place to gather news for me.
I have been thinking naively that nothing can happen in the neighbouring
countries without my knowledge. But who knows, Amma? Even I can be
deceived. I will have to concede that there are mysteries beyond my reach.”

Kunthavai had a thought. Perhaps this clever man knows that the Prince is alive
and is safely tucked in Choodamani Monastery in Nagapattinam.

She struggled hard not to reveal that to the Minister.

“Acharya, you speak the truth. I believe you. But I can’t believe that the warrior
from the Vaana clan could be Nandini’s spy. So please let him go.”

“Think about it, Amma. That girl Nandini has some magical powers.
Madhuranthakan, who had been an ardent devotee of Shiva, started thirsting for
the throne after coming in contact with her. Sambuvaraiyar’s son Kandhanmaran
has gone to Adithya Karikalan carrying her secret message. Parthibendra
Pallavan, who had been an avowed enemy of Pazhuvettaraiyars, has become her
slave. He has even proposed to divide the Chozha Empire into two giving one
half to Karikalan and the other to Madhuranthakan.”

“Oh My God! That’s scandalous. How can they ever think of dividing the
Empire? My ancestors gave their lives to consolidate the petty kingdoms into
one large empire. Dividing it now would be insulting my ancestors.”

“Amma, I know you don’t like the Empire being partitioned. Nor do I. This
proposal could have driven Parthibendran to war. But that Parthibendran is dead
today. The Parthibendran who is alive tops the list of those who want to divide
the Empire.”

“Oh My God! But what kind of magical powers does that witch have?”

“Princess, I was about to ask you the same question. And you are asking me! Let
it go. But tell me how you are so sure that Vandhiya Thevan would not have
fallen for her charms?”

"Acharya, I can’t lay my hands on any specific reason. At times, a mind bears
witness to another. Something tells me that the warrior of the Vaana clan would
not betray us.”

“If you are so sure, let us test him, Amma.”

“How?”

“We need to send a messenger to Kanchi immediately. The messenger should
have won the utmost trust and confidence of our Crown Prince.”

“What’s the message?”

“Didn’t you say a short while ago that Nandini is a venomous snake and then
sought my forgiveness for saying so? But the truth is that Nandini is several
times more dangerous than a venomous snake. She is planning to destroy the
entire Chozha clan.”

“Oh My God!

Kunthavai’s mind resembled a sea caught in a storm.

“She has instigated Sambuvaraiyar to invite your brother Adithya Karikalan to
the Kadambur palace. She is planning to marry off Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter
and Pazhuvettaraiyar’s daughter to Karikalan. She is going to propose
bifurcation of the Chozha Empire to arrive at a kind of compromise between
Karikalan and Madhuranthakan. But these are just her outward moves. No one
knows her innermost motives. Even I, who pride in knowing virtually
everything, do not know her hidden agenda.”

“What should we do Acharya?”

“We should prevent Adithya Karikalan from going to the Kadambur Palace. You
and I should send letters to Karikalan through Vandhiya Thevan. If Karikalan
decides to go to Kadambur Palace ignoring our warnings then Vandhiya Thevan
also should go along with him. Like the life, which never leaves a body,
Vandhiya Thevan should never be away from Karikalan during the visit. He
should never let Nandini meet Karikalan alone at any cost.”

Kunthavai sighed. She knew how crucial the proposed mission was.

‘But does he know everything, including the personal details? Or only those
relating to the political affairs?’

“Acharya, why do you think it is so important to prevent Karikalan from meeting
Nandini?”

“Princess, some of the deceased Veerapandiyan’s personal bodyguards have

vowed to eliminate the Chozha clan. And the irony is that they are funded by the
new gold coins from our treasury, which is under the sole control of the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. I don’t think I have to say anything more than that.”

“Please don’t say anything more,” mumbled Kunthavai. She remembered her
younger brother who was lying sick in the Choodamani Buddhist Monastery.

His life might be at risk as well.

"Acharya, it’s really the good fortune of Chozha Empire that when it is facing
dangers in all directions, somebody like you is the Chief Minister. I want to
know what you have done regarding my younger brother.”

“I have ordered special poojas to be performed in all the Shiva and Vishnu
temples of the Chozha Empire. Buddhist and Jain monasteries are also going to
join us in our prayers. Especially the monks in Choodamani Monastery in
Nagapattinam are going to do special prayers, which might last for forty days.
What else do you want me to do?”

Kunthavai observed the facial expression of the Chief Minister especially when
he uttered the name ‘Choodamani Monastery’. There was no change in his face.

“Acharya, as I hear the words Choodamani Monastery, I am reminded of
something. It appears that the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar is not quite happy with
that monastery. When he heard that the monks in Lanka wanted to crown the
Prince as their King, Pazhuvettaraiyar’s anger has increased many times. Who
knows, he might even shift the blame on the monks of that monastery for the
Prince’s fate. I request you to please give enough protection to the Buddhist

monastery.”

“I’ll attend to it straightaway, my child. With Emperor’s orders, I will post a
small battalion of our army in the monastery. Tell me what do you think of
sending Vandhiya Thevan to Kanchi?”

“Acharya, if the mission is so critical why don’t we send somebody else?”

“If you still trust him I want to send him. I have heard about his acts of bravery.
And this mission requires somebody who is not afraid of anything. I saw it with
my own eyes today. At the Palace yard, he pounced on the Doctor’s son and
gave him real hell. If I had not intervened, the Doctor’s son would have gone
upward to attend on the Lord of Death.”

The Princess was immensely pleased. Yet she was a little reluctant.

“Yes, he is a warrior. But he is rash. And emotional. Gets excited fast. See how
quickly he started a fight today.”

“Then I’ll send my disciple Azhwarkkadian along with him. He is known for his
composure and poise.”

Kunthavai started thinking.

‘Even God Himself may not know what is in this man’s mind. He is sending a spy

to spy on a spy.’

Chapter 29: The Change in Vanathi

Kunthavai was going to the State Prison to free Vandhiya Thevan. She had
planned to send him on the crucial mission of guarding the Crown Prince.

She was surprised to see Vanathi coming towards her. Vanathi touched the feet of
the Princess. Kunthavai hugged her and spoke to her in a voice soaked in love.

“Sorry, dear. I could not be with you. I am now on an important mission. I will
be back in a short time. Meanwhile you can relax in the garden. But don’t ever
go near the canal.”

“Akka, I won’t trouble you anymore. I want to go to Kodumbalur. Please let me
go.”

“What happened to you, Vanathi? Why everybody is keen on giving shocks to
me today? What wrong did I do? Why are you angry with me? What is the
reason for this sudden love towards your people at Kodumbalur?”

“Angry? With you, Akka? No way. I’d then be the most ungrateful dog in the
whole world. Neither is there any love for ‘my people’. My father and mother
are not there. I can’t even call others as my people, Akka. Once my mother had
promised to offer special prayers to Goddess Kaali, whose temple is near my
town. The poor soul died before she could fulfil that promise. You know I faint
quite often these days. I think this might perhaps be due my mother’s not
fulfilling the promise to Kaali.”

“But then, Vanathi, you need not go that far for such a simple matter. I’ll send
my men to see that those special prayers offered on behalf of you and your
mother.”

“I have another work, Akka. I hear that my father’s brother is coming back from
Lanka. He will not come to Pazhaiyaarai to see me here because he has to cross
Thanjavur to come here, which he hates to do. I want to be in Kodumbalur when
he returns home. I want to hear directly from him about what happened in
Srilanka.”

“Why are you so keen on knowing that?”

“Can’t I, Akka? Have you forgotten that my father died in the Lankan war?”

“No, I have not. But that humiliation is now wiped out.”

“I am afraid, not fully, Akka. My uncle is returning in a hurry even before the
war is over.”

“Well, are you going to ask him to go back to Lanka and resume the war? And
you want to go to Kodumbalur for that reason?”

“Who am I Akka to advise him? I just want to know what happened there.”

“Oh, now I understand! You silly girl! You want to know about Ponniyin
Selvan’s acts of valour on the battlefield directly from your Periappa, right?”

“Is it wrong, Akka?”

“Not at all. But it is wrong to leave me alone especially at this time when I need
your company the most.”

“Akka, I am not leaving you alone. You have loads of friends. And there are
loads of people for whom your slightest whim is a divine command.”

“You too have started talking like others. Perhaps you lost your mind on hearing
the shocking news about my younger brother. You need not worry too much
about that news.”

“He’s your brother, Akka. How can I have worries about him when you do not
seem to have any?”

“Tell me the truth, Vanathi. How did you fall into the canal? Did you faint and
fall down? Or deliberately jumped into it?

“Why should I jump into it? I fainted when I was walking near the canal and fell
down. You and that warrior from the Vana clan saved me.”

“You don’t seem to be grateful.”

“Not merely in this birth, but in all my future births I’ll be beholden to you for
what you have done for me.”

“Why are you talking as if you are going to die now? Listen, Vanathi. Don’t
worry about anything. I don’t think Arulmozhivarman’s life is in danger. I am
repeating what I told the people of Pazhaiyaarai a little while ago. On a fateful
day in the past when my younger brother fell into the river, Mother Cauvery
herself rescued him. Similarly, the Sea King would have saved him now. I am
sure some good news will come to us soon.”

“How are you so sure, Akka?”

“I have a strong intuition. If he had been in danger, my intuition would have
warned me. I will not be talking like this now.”

“I don’t believe in intuition, Akka. I don’t have any faith on what’s inside our
mind or outside it.”

“Now tell me, how are you so sure about it?”

“I’ve been experiencing a strange hallucination for the past few days. It even
comes in my dreams. At times the scene is enacted before me in a vision even
while I am fully awake.”

“Can you describe your vision for me?”

“Your brother’s face was appearing in water quite frequently. It also seemed to
call me in. And this hallucination happened in my dreams too.”

“Why do you call it a dream? It perfectly matches with the news that has come
to us.”

“Listen, Akka. If you know the whole story, you’ll know that it is idiotic. You
know I fainted and fell in the canal. In my unconscious state, I had gone even to
the Naga Loka, the world of snakes. I saw a marriage happening there.”

“Who are the bride and the groom?”

“I don’t want to tell you about it now. I just want to tell you that I have lost faith
in whatever vision appears in my mind and even what I dream. I have decided to
believe only that which I see and hear.”

“You are wrong, Vanathi. Even what you see and what you hear might turn out
to be falsehood. Whatever your intuition tells you alone is real. I can cite so
many examples from popular literature to vindicate my statement.”

“I’ll hear about them some other time. Please let me go now.”

Kunthavai was surprised.

‘How did this girl become so bold and so strong all of a sudden?’

“Why are you in a hurry, Vanathi? Even if you have decided to go, why don’t
you wait for a few days? The whole country is in the midst of chaos now. Should
I not send you with proper security?”

“Why should I be afraid, Akka? What should I fear? The four men who bore my
palanquin from Kodumbalur and the four security guards who came along are
just whiling away the time here in this palace, eating and sleeping. I’ll take them
back.”

“Do you think I’ll send you like that?”

“I beg of you, Akka. I am not afraid at all. Nobody would dare to hurt this
Kodumbalur Vanathi. Everyone knows that I am the best friend of Princess
Kunthavai. Who’d dare to hurt me, Akka? I beg your permission, Akka. Please
let me visit the Astrologer of Kudanthai on the way. I want to consult him on
some personal matters. Can I do that, Akka?”

“I also want to consult him. But you seem to be in a hurry.”

“No, Akka. This time I’ll meet him alone.”

Kunthavai was astonished.

This girl has changed inside out in just one day, no, not even a day, just a few
hours. She has become very obstinate. There is no point in holding her back any
longer.

“Ok, Vanathi as you please. Arrange for your travel. I am going to Pazhaiyaarai
prison to free the warrior from the Vana clan. Will come back soon to see you
off.”

Chapter 30: The Two Prisons

After Vanathi went away, Kunthavai went to the Pazhaiyaarai prison. She made
her guards stand outside the prison and walked directly into the cell in which
Vandhiya Thevan was held. He had been assigned to a separate cell. He appeared
happy. He was singing folk songs in an off-key, loud, enthusiastic voice.

“Oh my dear deer
The stars of the sky
Have forgotten themselves
And have become ecstatic
On seeing you

Kunthavai came near the cell and cleared her throat. It was only then Vandhiya
Thevan noticed her. He sprang up to attention to accord a formal welcome to the
beautiful Princess of Pazhaiyaarai.

“Most Welcome, Princess! Your Excellency may graciously occupy a seat!”

“Which seat shall I sit on?”

“This is your palace, Your Excellency. You are the Queen... Everything happens
according to your command. You can choose whatever seat you want, Your

Excellency.”

“When your ancestors were the kings of all the three worlds, your Vallam Palace
must have looked something like this. I agree. But in our country we call this
place a jail.”

“Your Excellency, there in my town we have neither the palace nor the jail. The
kings of several countries joined hands to demolish our palaces and jails more
than a hundred years ago.”

“Why? Why did they do that?”

“It’s all because of a big mouthed poet.”

“Oh! Really? I don’t understand the connection.”

“When my ancestors were the Emperors of the South, our officials used to arrest
those kings who defaulted in their taxes. These kings were confined to the cells
built on both the sides of the backyard of our palace. Those poor kings waited
for the Emperor’s call so that they could beg for forgiveness and win their
freedom back. It was not easy to see the Emperor. They used to watch a crowd of
poets making a beeline to the Emperor’s court, who would compose poems
before the Emperor and get their reward. The imprisoned kings watched these
poets returning with their rewards. The kings would lament, “Oh My God! How
lucky these poets are! Just look at the rewards they are taking home.”

One of the kings would shout, “Oh My God, that poet is taking my parasol.”

“Oh My God! That palanquin is mine” – another king would cry in distress.

“That’s all right, friend. This poet is riding on my Royal elephant”, another king
would cry.

“This is my horse! One day surely my horse will trip him over,” said another.

One day, the poet who was the last to leave, heard these conversations, ran back
to the Emperor’s court and repeated the words of the imprisoned kings to the
Emperor. Instead of narrating them, he recited them as a beautiful poem, which
later became very popular all over Tamilnadu.

People loved to hear that song. That proved our undoing. All the kings became
jealous of the Emperor of Vallam and invaded our country. The first thing they
did after succeeding in the war was to demolish our palace and our jails.”

"Even then they could not destroy the song composed by that poet. Yes, your
clan is fortunate. Its glory will be there for all time to come.”

“Here I have come, Your Excellency, to tarnish the honour and glory of our great
clan.”

“You are now accepting the truth. Something very rare!”

“I do not have a choice, Your Excellency. The worst among all types of slavery
is to be a slave to a woman. It was because I listened to the words of a woman
that my clan’s glory was lost; and it was for the same reason that I had to be in
hiding, constantly running for my life. I wanted to vent my anger and frustration
by killing that Doctor’s son with my own hands. I was not even allowed to do
that.”

“Why should you be so furious over the Doctor’s son, Pinaakapaani?”

“I have my reasons, Your Excellency. You gave me an excellent companion for
my journey to Kodikkarai. He almost spoilt my mission. I could have let that go.
Sometime ago he tried to brand me as the enemy’s spy and have me captured by
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men. When I somehow escaped from there, at the front yard
of the Palace before thousands of people he accused me of being “Pazhuvur
Queen’s spy”

“He spoke the truth, Prince of Vallam”

“Oh My God! What are you saying, Your Excellency?”

“Pinaakapaani accused you of spying for Nandini’s. Is it true or not?”

“I have taken a vow not to speak the truth, Your Excellency.”

“Excellent vow! I presume you must have taken that vow while meeting the

Pazhuvur Queen on the banks of Harischandra River. “

“No, no. I had taken the vow much earlier. I had been speaking lies all along.
Everyone believed me. From the slip of tongue, I also said that our Prince is safe
at Nagapattinam. No one believed me. They simply laughed at me.”

“That was a great blunder. It is better that they did not believe your words. If
only they did the consequences would have been disastrous.”

“Don’t worry, Your Excellency. I won’t commit such blunders in future.”

"Thanks for the promise.”

“What promise did I give?”

“Didn’t you say that in future you’ll do your assigned task without any lapses?”

“Oh My God! I never promised that, Your Excellency. Please have me released
from prison. Let me go my way and live my life.”

“Then there is no release for you. You will be imprisoned here for life.”

Vandhya Thevan laughed.

“Why are you laughing? Do you think this is a joke?”

“No, Your Excellency. Do you think I can’t escape from this prison if you do not
free me?”

The Princess cast a pointed glance at the Prince of Vallam with her large eyes.

“I know you are very smart, especially when it comes to escaping from jails. For
a person who escaped from the underground treasury of Pazhuvettaraiyars,
running away from this prison will be a mere cake walk.”

“Then, Your Excellency, why don’t you open the door and let me out?”

“Yes, I have the powers to open the door. I have the authority to let you go. You
can go out of this prison. But there is another prison from which you can never
go out.”

“Do you mean the underground dungeons of the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar?”

“No. Even that is nothing for you. You’ll even win over the tigers waiting
outside the prison gates and run out of that prison.”

“Then, pray tell me what prison are you referring to?”

“My heart! You have been imprisoned here. And you can never go out of it.”

“Your Excellency let me remind you once again. I am an orphan. I don’t have
any house or land. All the glories of my clan are just old tales that sprung from
the fertile imagination of impoverished poets.

But, Your Excellency is the darling daughter of the Emperor whose sway
extends to all the three worlds and beyond...”

“Who knows? Someday even the Chozha clan’s glory might become an old
tale.”

“But today, Your Excellency, you have great powers in this country. Neither the
Emperor nor the Chief Minister, nor even the Pazhuvettaraiyars would dare to
oppose you.”

“If that’s true then why do you go against me?”

“Political authority is different, Your Excellency. You were referring to the
authority of your heart.”

“What’s wrong in that?”

“The huge status difference between us would make that wrong.”

“Haven’t you heard the saying ‘Nothing can stop true love’?”

“Then that saying will also apply to Ponniyin Selvan and the boat-girl
Poonkuzhali.”

“Sure. It will apply. I thought my brother is born to rule the world. That’s the
reason I wanted to block that love.”

“I too came here after enamoured by what I heard about our Prince. I wanted to
go with him to all the wars and do heroic deeds. And earn honour and glory.”

“What happened to that desire now? Is it gone?”

“In a way, yes. Ponniyin Selvan prefers a calm life to the throne. He prefers
renovating the temples to wielding the sword at the battle field.”

“And Madhuranthakan wants to be the King. The sheep wants to be lion. And
the lion wants to be sheep. I have heard of a story of Lord Shiva’s disciple. The
Great Lord changed foxes into horses and then horses back into foxes. That’s the
story happening in Chozha Empire today.”

“Your Excellency, I too became a fox because of your kindness. Like a fox I had
to hide myself, travel in stealth, had to do many tricks, spoke lies to escape from

the enemies. I cannot do this work any longer, Your Excellency. Please let me
go.”

“My best friend Vanathi has already let me down. She wants to go away from
me. You too want to let me down? You too want to go away from me?”

“Devi, I don’t know anything about your relationship with Vanathi. But how can
I let you down, Your Excellency? Kings and Emperors are waiting in a queue to
hold your golden hands. I am just a servant who has come here on an errand,
Your Excellency.”

The Princess extended her beautiful hand. Vandhiya Thevan could not believe
whether it was a dream or a reality. With hesitation, he held her hands with his
and then touched his eyes with her hand. His mind and body were in a state of
indescribable ecstasy.

“Warrior of The Vana Clan, you know that I am born of an ancient Royal clan
whose priceless ancestry is the honour of a woman. Some of our women have
jumped into the funeral pyre of their husbands. They looked upon the fire that
burnt their husband’s body as the cool moon and jumped into it.”

“I have heard of it, Devi.”

“After holding your hand my hand shall never hold another man’s hand so long
as I shall live.”

Vandhiya Thevan froze in his place. He saw the tear-laden eyes of the Princess.
He lost his mind. He was speechless.

“If your life is at risk because of your rash deeds, just imagine what will happen
to me.”

“Devi, how can this idiot, fortunate enough to have secured the throne of your
heart, afford to be a coward?”

“Cowardice is different from caution. Even our Chief Minister does not have any
doubts on your valour.”

“Then what does he doubt?”

“He suspects that you could possibly be a spy working for the Pazhuvur queen.”

“Then I am ready to give the same answer which I gave to the Doctor’s son.
Please open the door. And let me know where the Minister is.”

“The Doctor’s son at least knows some wrestling. The Chief Minister can wage a
war of words but does not know how to fight physically. His weapon is his sharp
intellect. He never relied on the sharpness of a sword for his wars.”

“Then let him test the sharpness of my sword, first.”

“You should know that in this country the Chief Minister is second only to the
Emperor. Even the Pazhuvettaraiyars are reluctant of openly opposing him.”

“That’s because they are guilty whereas I am not. Why should I be afraid of
him?”

“He is my father’s childhood friend. Any disrespect meant to him means
disrespect to the Emperor.”

“Then, I pray you; please tell me how I should win his confidence.”

“The Chief Minister wants to send the most reliable person available to Kanchi
on a critical mission. I have told him that you are the one.”

"Devi, I beg of you. Send me anywhere in this vast world except Kanchi.
Something in my mind shouts at me, “Don’t go to Kanchi.”

“That could possibly be the voice of the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur.”

“No, not at all! Do you think I’ll listen to that venomous snake against your
words?”

“Poor soul! Don’t ever talk about the Junior Queen in that derisive manner.”

“Why is this sudden change, Devi?”

“Yes, my mind has changed completely. After I heard the news you brought
from Lanka.”

“Oh My God! Then that means that I will have to act with utmost respect and
reverence to the Junior Queen.”

“Yes.”

“If she gives me the sword which she is worshipping and commands me to bring
the head of a person she names, should I obey her?”

Kunthavai’s body shook in fear. She spoke in a trembling voice.

“You should give respect to her; but there is no need to listen to her words.
Because even she might not know what she is up to.”

“That’s what she said, Devi. ‘I don’t know why I am keeping this sword in my
pooja.’”

Kunthavai trembled more.

“Only God can save this ancient Chozha clan.”

“And let the saving God use this poor man as His instrument.”

“It’s my hope as well. Once you return from Kanchi, you may have to go to
Lanka again. And you should somehow bring that mute woman here.”

“It’s easier to bring a typhoon neatly packed in a mud pot than to bring that lady
here. This is what somebody told about her. Yes, I now remember that
Vaishnavite, the fanatic Azhwarkkadian told once. He should have brought the
lady here.”

“No, he could not. You alone can do that.”

“Then, Devi, please don’t send me to Kanchi.”

“Why?”

“My employer is there in Kanchi. If he asks me to do something, I can’t refuse.
If he learns about the conspiracy of Pazhuvettaraiyars and other Chieftains, he
would be furious. If he knows that our Emperor is almost in a state of
imprisonment he would gather his army and march to Thanjavur. And if the
news about Ponniyin Selvan had reached his ears by this time he would have left
Kanchi.”

“I am sending you to Kanchi precisely for that. To somehow prevent him from
leaving Kanchi, at any cost.”

“If he has already left Kanchi... “

“Wherever he is, please be with him. I am now entrusting you with another work
– which is very, very important.”

“Sure!”

“We have got the news that the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and his queen Nandini
have left for the Kadambur Palace.”

“Is the Junior Queen going or somebody else going in her palanquin?”

“No, no. It is Nandini for sure. You know my uncle Prince Madhuranthakan is
still here in Pazhaiyaarai.”

“Why are they going to Kadambur?”

“They have invited the Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan to Kadambur. The
obvious reason is to discuss a marital alliance. But I hear that they are also going
to suggest a compromise plan – of splitting the Empire into two so that

Karikalan can rule one part while Madhuranthakan can rule the other.”

“My employer would never agree to that plan.”

“I am not concerned about that now.”

“Then, Devi?”

“I have a vague fear in my mind. For no apparent reason my heart is beating fast.
While I am half-asleep, I feel that I am surrounded by unnamed dangers. If I
lapse into a deep sleep, I have terrible nightmares. I wake up with a start. My
boy shivers.”

“Why are you asking me to go away from you at this time? If anything happens
to you I’ll give my life to... ..”

“My fears are not for my life but for my brother’s - the Crown Prince’s. I
shudder to think what would happen if he meets the Junior Queen there in
Kadambur Palace. You should prevent Nandini from having a private meeting
with Karikalan at all costs.”

“Devi, when the Crown Prince decides to do something, how can I stop it?”

“You should be the protective shield for my brother. If needed, disclose to him
the true identity of Nandini.”

“But will he believe it, Devi?”

“It’s your responsibility to make him believe. I don’t know how you are going to
do that. It’d be better if the meeting does not happen.”

“I promise I’ll do my best, Devi. But if I fail in my mission please do not find
fault with me.”

“Whether you win or lose I will never release you from the prison of my heart.”

Chapter 31: The Green Silk

Vandhiya Thevan was riding on the banks of River Arasalaaru the next morning.
The letter from the Chief Minister was safely tucked in his waistband. He was
riding slow trying his best to absorb the beautiful scenery on the way. It was the
second week of November corresponding to month of Aippasi in the Tamil
Calendar. The scenery on the Chozha countryside was captivating. Lady Nature
was dressed in glittering green and appeared very young and beautiful. But how
many shades of green one could see on her dress!

The paddy plants, which had just sprouted, wore a shade of green. Some old
plants wore another shade of green, while the new saplings sported another. The
leaves of the banyan tree were of another shade of green while those of the pupil
tree yet another. Next came the attractive shade of green chosen by the wellgrown leaves of lotus plants in the ponds. The plantain leaves displayed a catchy
shade of green while the tender coconut-sprouts went for a rare shade of ivory
green. There was also the green shade of the tender grass, the green colour of the
clear water and the green colour of the frogs, which were hopping around on the
banks of the water-bodies.

The green silk dress worn by Lady Nature bore a striking contrast to the dashing
colours of the flowers. The kuvalai, kumudham, red lotus and sengazhuneer
flowers appeared like star-shaped dots of various colours on the green saree.
Vandhiya Thevan’s eyes were drinking the beauty as his horse was idling along
the banks of the river. He had travelled by this route only a few months ago, in
August. He could appreciate the change of scene now.

At that time, the new tide was gushing through the river with foam and fury. But
now, the fury had subsided and the foam was gone. The river had given up its
red colour and become as transparent as a crystal. While it was raging fury at

that time, it was a smooth silky run in a mood of gay abandon now.

In July, the sound of the raging new tide, the sound of the Western winds hitting
the branches of the trees, the sound of a thousand birds….all these gave a festive
mood to the surrounding. But now with the leaves gently moving in the cold
Northern winds, the gentle sound of the water running out through the canals,
the off-key notes of the frogs expecting the rain and the buzz of the insects made
it appear as if it were a song of pathos played by the Nature’s orchestra.

Vandhiya Thevan’s mind was filled with a vague sense of grief. He had been
searching for the reason in the depths of his heart. In fact, there were enough
reasons for his mind to dance in joy. Whatever dreams he had when he rode on
the same path two months ago, had come true now.

He had seen Emperor Sundara Chozhan. He had seen the great cities of his times
– Thanjavur, Pazhaiyaarai, Mathottam and Anuradhapura. He had earned the
friendship of the man who was the darling of the people of the great Chozha
Empire –Ponniyin Selvan. He had the blessing of helping the great warrior when
he needed it the most.

One had to do penance for several years to have a mere glance at the goddess of
beauty, the shining light of the Chozha clan, Princess Kunthavai. Now he had
won her love. What a rare blessing! His heart was about to burst in pride. Along
with that was a feeling of fear propelled by the inherent uncertainty of things.

Am I so lucky to get the love of the Princess? Is it real or another dream of
mine? Will she be mine eventually? There is scope for a million hassles to come
between us.

The whole world is a bundle of hassles. What is this world? It’s full of sorcerers
like Ravidasan, witches like Nandini, conspirators like the Pazhuvettaraiyars,
people like Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran who do not think twice before
betraying their best friends, gullible girls like Poonkuzhali and Vanathi, fanatic
Vaishnavites and the gory Kalamukas, and of fire-emitting ghosts and
unfathomable man-trapping quicksand.

Thank God! I was somehow saved from all these dangers. Now I am caught in
the Mother of all Dangers. Yes, the Chief Minister has given me the most
dangerous assignment ever. On one extreme, I have the extremely short-tempered
Crown Prince. On the other I have that beguiling witch at whose hands even the
scheming Pazhuvettaraiyar is a mere puppet. My mission is to stop the witch
from executing her murderous plan and come out of it all successful and
unscathed. Is it humanly possible? I don’t know what is in the Minister’s mind.
Perhaps he wants me to get away from the Princess.

I clearly remember both the Minister and the Princess telling me that
Azhwarkkadian will join me in this mission. But I have not seen him so far.

Still, I don’t know much about that Vaishnava Fanatic. However, he has not hurt
me so far. He has only helped me. He has saved me a number of times. He is a
good travel companion. His enthusiasm is contagious. Where and when will he
join me? How long can I hold back this horse from going at full speed?

Oh My God! What do I see there! A cluster of trees whose exposed roots go up to
the river and look like live crocodiles. This is where I threw my spear at the
stuffed crocodile. Varini, Tharaka, Senthiru and Mandakini were laughing at my
act of ‘valour’. It was here that the Princess chastened them for making fun of
me. Let me stand here for a while.

Vandhiya Thevan got down from the horse and went along the riverbank. He was
looking at the river water, which was swirling around the roots of the trees. He
could see a beautiful face in the swirl – that of Princess Kunthavai.

Vandhiya Thevan was startled by a bass male voice.

“I saw! Yes, I saw. I saw something really sweet!”

The voice came from up above. A shocked Vandhiya Thevan looked up only to
see Azhwarkkadian perched up on the top-most branch of a tall tree.

“Oh My dear Vaishnava Fanatic, do I appear so sweet to your blessed eyes? Ok
let me have the pleasure of seeing you in better light. Will you be kind enough to
step down?”

The Vaishnavite spoke as he climbed down.

“The song was not about you, young man! With a sword on your dress and a
spear on your hand you look frightening to me.”

“Then who were you referring to?”

“The First and the Foremost God, Lord Vishnu, when He was born as the short
Vamana and lifted his little foot to measure the whole sky. And that appeared to
your Lord Shiva as if. . . “

“Stop it, I say! I strongly advise you to not to speak ill of Lord Shiva. Else,
you’ll be in danger. Grave danger, I should say.”

“What danger, young man? So long as the Disc of the kind Lord, that killed the
crocodile to save the elephant, is there to protect me no one can even touch my
hair.”

“It’s my duty to warn you. I have done my duty. It’s your call.”

“Tell me what kind of danger I am in.”

“Do you remember the people of Pazhaiyaarai storming the Palace gates? At that
time I overheard a conversation between two Kalamukas?”

“What were they talking about?”

“They have a grand plan to sacrifice the ever-growing numbers of Vaishnava
fanatics in the Chozha Kingdom. Once the Vaishnavites are killed they are going
to arrange all your skulls and dance on them.”

Azhwarkkadian instinctively felt his head. “My skull seems strong. Yes, it can
bear the dance of the Kalamukas.”

“As a reiteration of what I heard, I have been seeing a lot of Kalamukas all my
way. They are carrying human skulls and their lethal tridents. You should change
your hairstyle chanting the name of Shiva... “

“No, I can’t.”

“Why?”

“I can’t bring myself to repeat the name you just mentioned. Yes, I will chant
Vishnu’s name and then change my hairstyle and my dress. But definitely not the
other name. Look over there.”

Vandhiya Thevan looked in that direction and saw a palanquin moving along the
banks of the river. He could guess that its occupant was a woman. He could not
guess her identity. Should be a member of the Royal household. Who could it
be? He could see a maid walking alongside the palanquin bearers.

Could it be Princess Kunthavai? No, definitely not.

“Vaishnavite, do you know who is there in the palanquin?”

“Listen, young man! Why do you poke your nose in matters that do not concern
you? You have invited so many troubles in the past by such behaviour. This is a
highway. Anyone can go. Why are you bothered? Come on! Get on your horse
and gallop away towards your destination.”

“What happened to you? Has the Vaishnavite fanatic become an ascetic,
renouncing all worldly things? Have you forgotten what happened in
Veeranarayanapuram? Didn’t you ask me to deliver a letter to a lady who was
travelling in a closed palanquin?”

“That’s an old story. There is no need for you to quote that now.”

“Ok, let it go. I was told that you’d join me on the way. And for your sake, I
have been riding very slowly. Are you going to come with me or not?”

“You are riding a horse. I am on foot. How can we travel together? You go to the
banks of River Coleroon and wait for me. I’ll join you there tomorrow morning.”

Vandhiya Thevan was sure that Azhwarkkadian was involved in another secret
mission and that he would not come with him now.

“As you please.”

Vandhiya Thevan jumped on his horse. He looked in the direction he was about
to go. He saw black clouds gathering in the northeast.

“Vaishnavite, will it rain today?”

“I don’t know astrology. Now that Aippasi is born, there is a fair chance of a
rain. Whatever it is you need to ride fast. Stay in some choultry for the night.”

Vandhiya Thevan spurred his horse.

‘I don’t know astrology.’ Azhwarkkadian’s words somehow were stuck in his
mind. Then he remembered the astrologer of Kudanthai. The astrologer’s house
was on the way.

Why don’t I see him? Now that there are several claimants to the Chozha
Throne, who is going to be the lucky winner? Didn’t the astrologer say that
Ponniyin Selvan is like the pole star? But he is not interested in ruling the
country. The throne and the crown of Srilanka were virtually offered to him on a
platter. How effortlessly did he refuse them? The prediction that he would have
to face many dangers in life has largely come true. Similarly, will the prediction
that he will have a glorious future come true? How is it possible if he does not
take up the reins of this kingdom? How far will my dreams become true? Will I
get back the country lost by my ancestors? How far will I succeed in the
dangerous mission that I am involved in at present? Can I stand between
Karikalan and Nandini and do anything worthwhile?

I have been trapped by Nandini twice or thrice in the past. I was saved every
time. Will I be saved for one more time? Yes, she showed love and respect to me.
But I can’t read her mind. I am sure she has spared me for a specific reason.
That explains her enormous patience while dealing with me. I wonder what that
‘specific reason’ might be.

Vandhiya Thevan rode past the palanquin, which he saw a little while ago. This
time he did not want to dash against the palanquin. Nor did the palanquin want
to hit him. But when his horse crossed the palanquin, the screens parted slightly.
Vandhiya Thevan saw the Kodumbalur Princess Vanathi sitting inside. First, he
wanted to stop the horse and strike a conversation with her. Then he changed his
mind and rode ahead. He remembered what Princess Kunthavai told about

Vanathi.

Why was she travelling alone especially in these troubled times? The security
arrangements were not strong enough. He also saw another strange sight. Two
gory Kalamuka Saivites were looking pointedly at the palanquin.

What are they up to? Why are they looking at the palanquin? And who the hell
are they? Oh My God! I remember now! They were the ones who were talking
when I was sleeping on the banks of Harichandra River.

Vandhiya Thevan had never had a soft corner for Vanathi. He thought that
Vanathi stole the Prince from Poonkuzhali. He was therefore not happy with her.
But Princess Kunthavai loved Vanathi very much. If Vanathi were hurt, it would
plunge Kunthavai into a state of deep grief. What kind of danger would happen
to Vanathi?

Azhwarkkadian’s advice was quite sensible. ‘Why do you poke your nose in
matters that do not concern you?’ Vandhiya Thevan acted on that advice; but the
scene, of the gory Kalamukas eyeing Vanathi’s palanquin never left his mind.

Here, I have reached the house of the Kudanthai Astrologer. Let me pour my
questions to him. Oh My God! How I overlooked the obvious fact? Vanathi is
also headed for the astrologer’s place. Things cannot get any better. Before
Vanathi comes here let me finish my business with the astrologer. He jumped
from the horse, tied it to a tree and entered the house of the famous astrologer.

Chapter 32: The Creator’s Head

Vandhiya Thevan went into the house of the Kudanthai Astrologer for the second
time in his life. He felt very happy. It was only in that small house that he had
met Princess Kunthavai for the first time in his life. It was here that he had stood
transfixed in a state of ecstasy after glancing at the lotus-like face of the Princess
and her big, black, beautiful eyes. He had heard the sweet voice of Kunthavai for
the first time in his life in that place. All these happy memories rushed to his
mind. He could feel a rare kind of sweetness in his ears, in his mind, in his whole
body, even in his being.

The astrologer was preparing for his evening pooja. When he saw Vandhiya
Thevan, a smile blossomed on his face.

“Welcome, Young man. Aren’t you Vallavaraiyan?”

“You are right, Astrologer. Your predictions may be off the mark at times; but
not your memory power.”

“Thambi a strong memory is a fundamental requisite to learn astrology. Planets,
stars, the dasas, the bhukthis and the yogas - there are millions of permutations
and combinations. One has to bear everything in mind and then reckon the year,
month, day, the hour, the minute, the second, the time compassed in onehundredth of the second before predicting. Ok, let us have that discussion on
some other day. Didn’t you say that my predictions were off the mark? What do
you mean by that? Didn’t my predictions for you come true?”

“Isn’t there a way to find that also through your astrology?”

“There is a way, for sure. I can find how my predictions worked either through
astrology or through some intelligent guessing. Looks like my predictions have
come true for you. Otherwise you would not have come to see me again.”

“You are right.”

“That’s it. Tell me how!”

“Your predictions were perfect. A hundred percent true. I asked about my
mission. You said it may happen or may not. It happened exactly the way you
predicted. No, no! Even that is wrong. It didn’t just happen. It just ran away
when it saw me.”

“You are funny.”

“Yes, I am. And short-tempered too!”

“But when you enter this hut you should leave your anger at the door.”

“Yes, I thought of doing that. But I could not see your disciple at your door. If I
had left my bag of anger at your porch unguarded, somebody might steal it. That
is why I brought it in. What happened to your disciple, Astrologer? I vividly
remember his blocking my way when I came here last time.”

“Today is the New Moon day in the Tamil month of Aippasi. He has gone to the
banks of Coleroon River.”

“Tell me. What’s the connection between New Moon and Coleroon?”

"The great assembly of Kalamukas is being held on the banks of Coleroon. My
disciple is a Kalamuka.”

“Astrologer, I am planning to quit Saivism?”

“What will you do then?”

“Do you remember your friend Azhwarkkadian?”

“You mean, Thirumalai?”

“Yes. I will get lessons from him. Have his religious symbols all over my body
and become a Vaishnavite.”

“Why?”

“I saw some Saivites belonging to the Kalamuka sect on the way. After seeing
the human skulls they carry I don’t want to continue in Saivism.”

“You have seen many a battlefield. Why are you afraid of seeing a human
skull?”

“It’s not the question of fear. It’s just nauseating. Tell me, what’s the connection
between killing one’s enemy in the battlefield and wearing a garland of human
skulls on one’s neck?”

“Didn’t your employer Adithya Karikalan cut the head of Veera Pandiyan and
then take it in a procession?”

“He was merely fulfilling his vow. Do you know how much he repented for that
ghastly act? He did not have a garland of skulls. Nor did he carry the Pandya
king’s skull wherever he went. Why should Kalamukas be like that?”

“They do that only to remind themselves that life in this planet is not permanent.
You and I smear the holy ash on our foreheads. Do you know the significance of
that? That is only to remind us that this human body is not permanent. And one
day it will burn into ashes. The ash on our foreheads should remind us of the
ashes which our bodies would eventually become.”

“It’s true that the human body is mortal. One day, it is going to burn to ashes. Or
become one with the earth if buried. But Lord Shiva is immortal. Then why
should he carry a skull on his hand?”

“The skull in the Lord’s hand refers to the ego. It indicates the state of bliss,
which we would be in if only we can win over our ego. I don’t have to tell you
that the Lord dances in a blissful state holding the skull in his hand.”

“How can the skull represent the ego?”

“You don’t know a lot of things. It so happened that once, there was an argument
between Lord Brahma and Lord Vishnu as to who was the greater of the two.
Lord Shiva was asked to settle the issue. .

‘I want one of you to find the tip of my head while the other should find my feet.
Whosoever comes back first is the greater of the two.’

Lord Vishnu took the form of a boar, the Varaha, and went in search of the
Shiva’s feet burrowing into the ground. Brahma became a swan and flew up in
the direction of Shiva’s head. After a while, Vishnu came back and reported
honestly that he could not find Shiva’s feet. But Brahma lied that he had seen
the Lord’s head. Shiva plucked one of the five heads of Brahma to punish him. It
is the skull of that head of Brahma, which Shiva holds in his hand. Since it was
the ego which prompted Brahma to fight and then to lie, his head became a
symbol of ego.”

Vandhiya Thevan thought of something and laughed.

“What did you see that makes you laugh like this?”

“I didn’t see anything. I just thought of something and could not help laughing.”

“What’s that? Hope it is not some secret.”

“Not at all. If only the Lord wanted to give the same punishment to me as he
gave Brahma then I must have thousands of heads. I imagined myself with so
many heads and started laughing.”

“Going by the rule one head for one lie, you must have told thousands of lies.”

“Yes, Astrologer. I have. The problem is not with me but with my horoscope.
After meeting Ponniyin Selvan, I promised to tell the truth, nothing but the truth.
Once I told something very important that was true. But those who heard me did
not believe me.”

“You are right, Thambi. We are living in bad times. Today people do not even
believe lies; how will they believe the truth?”

“Your astrology is also in a similar state. Astrologer, do you remember your
predictions about Ponniyin Selvan? You said that he would be like the Pole Star
shining gloriously on the Northern skies.”

“Yes, I did.”

“Didn’t you hear the news about him?”

“Yes, I did. The whole country is talking about that.”

“Have you ever heard of a pole star drowning in the sea?”

“The pole star will never sink in the sea. But even that permanent pole star can
sometimes be covered by the clouds. Even today I see clouds in the North.
However hard you may try, you will not see the pole star today. Does that mean
that the pole star is gone?”

“Oh, is that what you think? Do you know anything about Ponniyin Selvan?”

“How can I? You jumped into the sea along with him. That is what the people
say. You should know better. I thought of asking you.”

Vandhiya Thevan switched the topic.

“How is the comet, Astrologer?”

“It’s getting longer and longer and can be seen late into the night. It will become
short quite soon. If Dhoomakethu is meant to cause a calamity, it should happen
soon. I am worried for the Royal household. ”

Vandhiya Thevan’s mind thought fast. He thought of the Emperor Sundara

Chozhan who was down with a paralytic stroke, of Ponniyin Selvan who was
suffering from a viral fever, of Adithya Karikalan who was going to meet
Nandini in the Kadambur Palace, of Madhuranthakan who because of his
craving for the Kingdom had earned the ire of the people, and finally of Nandini,
who was uttering sweet nothings while holding a lethal weapon in her hand.

“Let us discuss it some other day. On second thoughts, why should we bother
about the Royal household? Tell me whether I’d succeed in my mission.”

“I have to repeat what I told you earlier. You will be surrounded by dangers. But
you’ll win over them all with help from the most unexpected quarters at the nick
of time.”

Vandhiya Thevan heard the voices of women and men coming from the gate.

The next minute Vanathi and her maid walked in.

Vandhiya Thevan stood up to show his respects.

“Forgive me, Your Excellency. If only I had known that you will be coming here
I would not have come at all.”

Chapter 33: Vanathi Seeks Help

"Why are you angry with me? What wrong did I do to you? Why do you want to
avoid me? Why did you say that you would not have come if you knew that I’d
come?”

Vanathi’s pathetic voice melted Vandhiya Thevan.

Why should I be angry, and that too with this girl?

Poonkuzhali’s face flashed in his mind.

“Please forgive me, Princess. I never meant it. I will wait for you till you finish
your business with the astrologer. I am not in a hurry.”

“There is no need t. I am happy to know that you are not in a hurry. Actually, I
did not come to see the astrologer. I have completely lost faith in this man.”

The astrologer was offended.

“As you wish, Devi. But one day you will realise the power of my astrology. You
will praise this poor man at that time.”

“Let’s think of crossing the bridge when we come near it.”

She spoke to Vandhiya Thevan:

“I came here mainly to see you. I saw you on a horse. I thought you would stop
to have a word with me. But you ignored me. I am not surprised. Why should
anybody be interested in this orphan?”

Vandhiya Thevan had to struggle hard to fight his tears.

“What words, Your Highness! I never expected the darling daughter of
Kodumbalur Chieftain to talk like that. I never thought the foster daughter of our
Commander of the Southern Forces, Bhoothi Vikramakesari, would talk like
that. If the dearest friend of Princess Kunthavai of Pazhaiyaarai were to describe
herself as an orphan, who will accept that Devi? I thought it would be
disrespectful of your stature if I were to talk to you on the way. Please tell me, is
there anything I can do for you now?”

“Yes, you can surely do something for me. Right now. I came to this house only
to seek your help.”

“Tell me, Devi. If I can do... “

“Is there anything which you cannot do? I have heard about of your
accomplishments in Lanka. Promise me that you’ll help me.”

Vandhiya Thevan was reluctant to give a blank promise.

“It’ll be better, Devi, if you say clearly what you want from me.”

“Yes, you are right. I should not deceive you by getting a blank promise. Ok, let
me tell you what I want. Even this astrologer can know. No harm. I have decided
to embrace Buddhism and become a monk, abandoning this worldly life.”

“Oh My God!”

“What words, Devi!”

“No, you should not.”

“The world can’t bear that!”

“Impossible!”

Vanathi was silently listening to those passionate reactions of Vandhiya Thevan
and the astrologer. Finally she spoke:

“Yes, I have decided to become a Buddhist monk. But why do you object and
that too so strongly? I am not doing anything wrong. So many women of ancient
Tamilnadu have renounced their worldly lives in the past. Haven’t you heard of
Madhavi’s daughter, Manimekalai, who renounced this world and achieved a
divine status? Isn’t her story a major Tamil epic? Isn’t she worshipped as
Goddess Manimekalai? But I don’t have such ambitions. I tried to end this
useless life and I failed in that too. Perhaps God thinks that I should live for
some more time. I want to spend that time in a Buddhist monastery and serve my
fellow beings there. I am sure you will help me in this mission.”

Vandhiya Thevan had a small doubt in his mind. He shuddered.

“Devi, I don’t have the authority to comment on your momentous decision. You
should take the guidance and blessings of the elders in your family. I learn that
your uncle Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari will be returning from Lanka soon.”

“I am not going to wait for anybody. Nor am I going to listen to the advice doled
out by anybody. My decision is final. Nobody can change my mind. I seek your
help.”

“How can I help you in this, Devi?”

“I am now going to the Choodamani Buddhist Monastery in Nagapattinam. I
want to be initiated by the monks living there. And you should come with me to
Nagapattinam. That’s the help I seek from you.”

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked.

This girl is not as naïve as I think. She must have heard the conversation
between Princess Kunthavai and me. She is now trying to garner more
information from me. She is going to the Choodamani Monastery only to meet
Prince Arulmozhivarman. I’ll never be her accomplice in this act.

“I am sorry Your Highness. What you ask is beyond my means.”

“That’s surprising. For a warrior, who went to Srilanka and did many wonders
there, is accompanying this orphan to Nagapattinam, an impossible task?”

“That’s not impossible, Devi. But I can’t do it at this time. The Chief Minister
and the Princess have ordered me to go to Kanchi with an important message. I
am on the way. That is why I said it was impossible. Perhaps some other time.. .
“

“If you don’t want to do something you can invent a thousand reasons for not
doing it. All right. I started on this journey alone. On the way, I saw a few
Kalamukas and was a little afraid. That made me seek your help. If you cannot
help me, it is fine... Doesn’t God have the responsibility of protecting every one
of us? Let me trust him and continue with my journey. Who will have the mind
to hurt a girl who has decided to renounce this world! Astrologer, let me take
leave of you. So long.”

The Astrologer ran behind her.

“Devi, the light is fading. It is the New Moon day. I can see clouds in the North

East. Please stay in this poor man’s hut for the night and resume your journey
tomorrow morning.”

“I’m sorry, Astrologer. But I have to go. I am planning to stay in Thiruvarur for
the night. This man has refused to come. I am sure I can find somebody in
Thiruvarur. I am not very anxious about losing my life. After all I am not useful
to anybody.”

Vanathi got into the palanquin. Vandhiya Thevan and the astrologer were
watching the palanquin till it went out of sight.

At last Vandhiya spoke:

“The Princess of Kodumbalur was a timid woman till very recently. The other
friends of the Princess used to tease her because of her timidity. They made a toy
crocodile and tried to frighten her with that. Even I was deceived by that toy. But
how did this girl become so bold all of a sudden? How did she decide to travel
alone? Even more surprising is, why Princess Kunthavai let her go.”

“I too am surprised. When this girl came to this hut last time, she fainted. She
spoke in a weak, hesitant voice. Is this woman the same as the other one? I doubt
it. Did you see how she talked – fearless and determined?”

“What is the reason for the change?”

“Some rude shock.”

“What could have shocked her?”

“The news about Ponniyin Selvan. Don’t you know that there were talks getting
this girl married to the Prince?”

Vandhiya Thevan started to think.

Is it the news about Ponniyin Selvan drowning in the sea? Or the news about his
being in the Nagapattinam monastery? Or the news about Poonkuzhali which I
shared with Kunthavai? What could have given her such a shock?

"I have a doubt, Astrologer. All the members of the Kodumbalur clan are
staunch Saivites. Why is this girl attracted to Buddhism?”

“Perhaps there was some connection to Buddhism in her past lives.”

“But why should she choose the Choodamani Monastery of all the places?”

“Yes, that surprises me too.”

“Can’t you find that out with your astrological powers?”

“No, Thambi. This does not belong to the science of astrology. This belongs to a
different science – espionage.”

“Is espionage a science?”

“Why not? Haven’t you heard about a book called Thirukkural?”

“Yes, I vaguely remember.”

“There is a canto called ‘Espionage’ in that book. There are ten couplets in that
canto.”

“Oh, is it so? Can you recite me a few good couplets from that canto?”

“All the couplets are good. Listen to this.”

The astrologer recited the couplet and then explained its meaning.

“It’s the duty of the King to spy on those who work for him. He should spy even
on his own relatives. And should employ spies to know about the enemy as
well.”

“Oh!”

“And listen to this. He has laid down the qualities of a good spy.

The spy has to don the robes of a monk, at times has to act like a corpse and
should never let out the secret even if tortured by the enemies. The spy should be
tireless all the time.

And this poet suggests a system of checks and balances in the field of espionage.
He says that if a spy brings in a very important piece of information, it should be
crosschecked using another spy. Don’t tell me you have not heard these
couplets?”

Vandhiya Thevan was surprised. He vowed to himself that he should read the
great work Thirukkural at the next available opportunity. A person who wrote
like that about the intricate political affairs of a country a thousand years ago
should be a real genius.

Vandhiya Thevan was talking to the Astrologer for some time before taking
leave of him.

“Thambi, why don’t you stay here for the night and resume your journey
tomorrow morning?”

“I’ll be going through this way again. I’ll be your guest at that time.”

“When you come here again you’ll know that all my predictions have come

true.”

“But you did not give any predictions today. How will the unspoken predictions
come true?” Vandhiya Thevan had a hearty laugh before jumping on his horse.

There was only a single road from the astrologer’s house. So Vandhiya Thevan
had to go in the direction of the palanquin. At the end of a short ride, he arrived
at a crossroad. There were two roads now. One went north to the banks of River
Coleroon while the other went southeast to Thiruvarur. Vandhiya Thevan saw the
palanquin at a distance in that road. For a second he was deeply disturbed.

I ought not to have refused the help sought by that girl. Yes, she really needs
help. What if there is some danger on the way? And if I come to know of that
later how can I forgive myself? I will feel guilty for a long time, for having
refused to give her the support she very badly needed. But what can I do? I have
very strict orders from the Chief Minister and the Princess. I cannot afford to
interfere in anybody’s affairs. In the past, I interfered in similar I have suffered
enough. Azhwarkkadian has also warned me. How can I take her to the
Choodamani Monastery at Nagapattinam? Impossible!

Now his mind was clear. He turned the horse on to the road that led to the banks
of Coleroon. At the same time, he heard a loud scream. It was a woman’s voice.
He was shocked. Instinctively he turned to the other road. The palanquin was not
there. Yes, it could have turned a corner. But he decided to check. After all, he
was not going to be delayed by this.

He spurred his horse. He reached the turn on the other road in no time. Oh My
God! What he saw there made his heart stop for a second.

A woman was bound to a tree. Her mouth was stuffed with cloth. It was quite
dark and he did not know the identity of the woman. He went near the tree and
was shocked to see that it was Vanathi’s maid. She was groaning in pain and was
trying to get herself released.

Vandhiya Thevan jumped from the horse and ran up to her. He released her from
the ropes... Vandhiya Thevan did not fail to notice the fact that she was not so
securely bound.

“What happened, girl? Come on, fast. What happened to the palanquin? What
happened to the Princess?”

The maid was not coherent.

This is what Vandhiya Thevan inferred from his words:

When the palanquin had turned the corner about seven or eight men sprang from
behind the trees. Some of them carried human skulls and tridents. Two of them
hit the maid on her head, pushed her down and gagged her. Meanwhile the rest
issued harsh commands to the palanquin bearers. They left the main road and
took an alley. They were running with the palanquin. Others followed them.
Vanathi’s voice was not heard at all.

The maid then pointed to the alley.

“Ok, you run to the astrologer’s house. I’ll go for the Princess.”

Vandhiya Thevan jumped on his horse. The horse left the main road and took the
dark alley. It galloped in the forest road unmindful of the bumps, of the shrubs
and bushes on the way.

Chapter 34: The Torch Went Off

It was New Moon day. The whole area was plunged into darkness. The northern
dark had dispersed all over the sky. Not even a single star twinkled in the sky.
The fireflies flying low over the trees and bushes provided a little light, which
was all Vandhiya Thevan had to find the way. He did not know where he was
going and why. He did not even know whether there would be any use in his
going. Kunthavai’s best friend was in danger. He thought it was his duty to save
her. Of course, he would try his best and leave the rest to God.

The horse had been running for the good part of an hour. He could not see the
palanquin. Vandhiya Thevan now thought that he had embarked on a foolish
venture. He stopped the horse. He heard some sounds at a distance. He listened
to them - sound of horse-steps. He could not say from the sound whether there
was one horse or many. It could be the soldiers guarding the palanquin now.

‘I should be extremely careful. I should not be caught in a regiment. That will
not help Vanathi. And that will spoil my work as well.’

He rode slowly stopping frequently to examine the path. He was sure that he was
following a single horse. It appeared as if the horse going before him was
negotiating a steep gradient. He did not want the horseman to know that he was
being followed. He wanted to hide himself. He looked around. There was a
dilapidated building with its walls almost torn down. He went to the place and
stopped his horse behind a blank wall. He was straining his eyes to see the horse
climbing up a share gradient. The light was not enough. His eyes hurt.

“Who is that?” – The voice shocked Vandhiya Thevan.

The voice was familiar.

“Your Excellency. It is me. Your slave.” – Somebody responded to the royal
voice.

A minute later, a torch appeared in that place. A man came from behind a tree
with a burning torch in his hand. Vandhiya Thevan could now see the horse in
that light. He could also see the rider.

‘Oh My God! Prince Madhuranthakan!’

When the other man lifted the torch close to the horse’s face the horse got
frightened. It lifted its front legs high. Then it started to run.

The horse had been standing on the banks of a canal. It jumped from the highbanks right into the canal. The torchbearer ran behind the horse shouting, “Our
King! Our King!” and soon he too jumped into the canal. He tripped and fell
down. The torch fell from his hands and the light was gone.

The darkness was more intense now. It started to drizzle. Vandhiya Thevan heard
a cacophony of sounds – the trees swaying in the wind, the sound of the drizzle,
the coarse voice of the frogs welcoming the rain, the call for help coming from
men and the sound of horse-steps. Vandhiya Thevan knew that Prince
Madhuranthakan was not exactly known for his courage.

Vandhiya Thevan was worried over the safety of the heir- apparent to the Chozha
Throne. He was on the back of a horse, which was running amok. The horse
might keep running or it might drop him, most probably in the canal.

The torchbearer ought to have run behind the horse and saved the Prince. Was it
possible? He had already fallen into the water. What could Vandhiya Thevan do?
Should he go after Vanathi? Or help the Prince in distress?

‘I don’t know where Vanathi is. But the Prince is fighting for his life before my
eyes. It is easier to help the Prince than go on a wild-goose search for Vanathi.
Once I save the Prince and get him out of danger, I can then go in search of
Vanathi. Oh My God! What will happen to my resolution of not poking into
other’s affairs? What is happening now?

Vandhiya Thevan brought out his horse from its hiding. It was dark and still
drizzling. Vandhiya Thevan had nothing but his intuition to guide him. He went
towards the place where Madhuranthakan’s horse jumped into the canal. He too
got into the water. He looked around. He could not see anything. He could hear
strange sounds at a distance. Aaaaaaaaaaaah... ooooooooooh... eeeeeeeeeeee tada
pada tada pada kada kada kada kadaa. He could not recognize the sound.

He rode up to the other bank and got out of the canal. He looked beyond the high
banks. He could see nothing but paddy fields on all the sides. It was impossible
to lead the horse through the mud and the field. He had to go along the banks in
search of the Prince.

The canal-bank was full of thorny bushes. Vandhiya Thevan had to ride through
a narrow path in the middle of thick growth. Lashing rains from above, slippery
mud floor blow, canal on the one side and paddy fields on the other, bushes
everywhere – the horse was walking very slowly. A minute seemed like a day.

The soft drizzle had grown into a heavy rain. The darkness seemed to grow more
intense with every passing minute.

Why should Prince Madhuranthakan ride to this godforsaken place without
proper help and guidance? Where was he going? Who received him? Does he
have a role in the abduction of Vanathi? What would have happened to that
innocent girl? Why should I be caught in this hopeless situation? Why should I
interfere in somebody’s business? Why don’t I find the highway to Kanchi and set
out on my mission? But can I do that in this darkness and rain? How can I be so
sure, that these things do not concern me?

But wait, didn’t I get some mileage by watching the conspiracy drama unfolding
at the Kadambur Sambuvarayar’s Palace?

That was different. I do not think I would gain anything by riding along the
canal bank in utter darkness except perhaps getting myself drenched. If the horse
trips and falls down fracturing his leg... well, my travel plans would go haywire.

Let me return to the dilapidated building. And stay there till the rain stops. But
what do I see in the flash of a lightning! Yes, it is a horse. It is standing on a
farmyard. Having come thus far why don’t I have a look? If I can help Prince
Madhuranthakan now I might gain something in future.

Vandhiya Thevan turned the horse towards the farm. When he came near the
yard the horse standing there appeared like a huge black ghost. There was
another flash of lightning, which illuminated the horse again. Vandhiya Thevan
could now see that the horse did not have a rider. He heard a thunder. The horse
was frightened by the sound. It ran amok once again. There was no point in
following a frightened horse, he decided.

He thought that Madhuranthakan might have fallen from the horse and he should
be somewhere in the vicinity. “IS ANYBODY THERE?” Vandhiya Thevan’s
thunderous voice was heard over and above the sound of thunder and falling
rain. His voice echoed in all the four directions but there was no response.

Meanwhile the rain became heavier. Cold winds from north lashed against his
face. Raindrops and strong winds attacked him from the sides. The horse shook
its body. Vandhiya Thevan shivered...

There was no point in hanging around any longer, he thought. He turned the
horse around and retraced his steps. He was quite upset with his impulsive
decisions. He vowed to himself not to indulge in such foolishness in future. He
would mind only his business and do nothing more.

His horse found the way back to the dilapidated building by sheer intuition. It
neighed as soon as it reached the building. Vandhiya Thevan returned to the
world of reality. He jumped down from the horse. His clothes were wet.

‘Will there be a shelter for me and my horse to stay for the night?’ He went
around the building.

Imagine somebody walking in an open place in pouring rain and stepping over a
live flame! Vandhiya Thevan had a similar feeling. It was not a live flame. Nor
was it a ghost. It was the voice of a child.

“Amma! Amma!”

But neither could a ghost or an evil spirit be ruled out. For how else could one
explain the voice of a child in that godforsaken place?

No, no! There are no ghosts or spirits in this world except in the imagination of
some cowards.

“Amma! Amma! hm.. hm.. “That was clearly the voice of a human child. A child
who had lost its mother.

The voice came from the dark parts of the building.

Is the child alone?

“Amma! Amma! hm.. hm.. “

Vandhiya Thevan walked towards the voice. “Who’s there?” He thundered.

“Who’s there?” The child’s voice echoed his words.

“It’s me. Who are you? What are you doing in the dark? Come out.”

“It’s raining outside.”

“It has stopped. Come.”

“Where’s my mother?”

“She has gone out to fetch milk for you.”

“No, you are lying.”

“Are you going to come out or shall I come in?”

“I have a knife in my hand. I will stab you. Mind it.”

“You talk like a warrior. Why don’t you come out and stab me?”

“Who are you? Aren’t you a tiger?”

“I am not a tiger. I am a horse.”

“You are lying. Will a horse talk?”

“But will a tiger talk?”

“But my mother told me that if I come out the tiger will spring on me.”

“I am not a tiger. I will not spring on you. Come out. You don’t have to fear me.”

“Fear? Why should I be afraid?”

A small child walked out of the building. By that time the rain had completely
stopped. The clouds had parted revealing a host of twinkling stars. Vandhiya
Thevan saw the child in starlight. The child was wearing a silk cloth around his
waist. He was very beautiful. . A necklace made of gems adorned his neck.

This child must be part of a royal household. Who is his mother, who had the
heart to leave this precocious child in this scary place? Why did she come here?
Why did she leave the child here?

Meanwhile the child too saw Vandhiya Thevan in starlight and blurted out.

“You are not a horse. You look like a human being to me.”

“The horse is there too.” Vandhiya Thevan pointed out his horse.

The child saw the animal.

“Oh, you have bought it for me? But I was told that a palanquin will come for
me.”

The child’s words ignited many conflicting thoughts in Vandhiya Thevan’s mind.

‘Who’s this child? What is he doing here? It is surprising that the child is
fearless in these surroundings. Who had promised to send a palanquin for this
child? Why hasn’t it come? Who’s his mother and where has she gone now?’

“Why did your mother leave you here, my dear?” – Vandhiya Thevan asked the
child in an affectionate voice.

“No, mother did not leave me. I only left her.”

“But why?”

“I saw a horse running. I wanted to catch the horse and ride on it. My mother
said that I could not do that. I disobeyed her and ran behind the horse. By the
way the horse standing over there, is it the same horse?”

“No, this is a different one. Then how did you come here?”

“I could not see the horse. Neither could I see my mother. It started raining. I ran
into this building.”

“Aren’t you afraid to be alone in dark?”

“Why should I fear? I am used to darkness. I am like this every day.”

“You are not even afraid of the tiger?”

“Only Amma is. I am not afraid. I am a fish. Fish will swallow the tiger.”

“Can a fish swallow a tiger?”

“I am no small fish. I am a huge fish. I am a shark. A whale. I can swallow
tigers, lions and elephants.”

Vandhiya Thevan suddenly felt uncomfortable. The sea of his mind became
turbulent. A fish that could swallow a tiger must be a miracle. The child must
have been tutored to talk like this. Who could have done that?

“What’s the noise over there?” – The child asked in a majestic voice. Vandhiya
Thevan turned around to have a look. A crowd of men was coming towards
them. Some were holding burning torches. He could see a palanquin in their

midst. The crowd appeared nervous. Everyone was running here and there in an
excited state. Vandhiya Thevan clearly remembered seeing a woman in the
crowd.

“There!” “Here!” ‘”No, it’s here.” “It’s there.” Vandhiya Thevan could hear the
anxious voices.

A person in the crowd pointed to the dilapidated building. The next moment
every one came running towards the building.

“There they are. The palanquin is coming too. But I hate travelling in a
palanquin. Will you let me ride on your horse?”

Vandhiya Thevan was attracted by the child’s appearance, his fearless
demeanour and his commanding words. For a moment he felt like lifting the
child and kissing him on his cheeks. But he suddenly changed his mind.

“I have some other work to do. And it’s urgent.”

“Where are you going now?”

“Kanchi.”

“Kanchi? That’s where my enemy lives.”

Vandhiya Thevan was shocked. Even standing near the child would be an act of
betrayal to his employer, thought the Prince of Vallam. He did not have time to
mount on this horse and flee from the scene. The crowd was very near. And if he
ran away now it would give rise to unnecessary suspicion. A strange curiousity
gripped Vandhiya Thevan. He wanted to know what those people were up to. He
moved aside and stood near the wall under the cover of darkness.

“I am here.”

The child moved forward and proclaimed. The woman had reached the place
first. She must have been running for a while. She was gasping for breath. She
ran towards the child and hugged him.

“See what you have done, Pandya!”

The next person to come was Sorcerer Ravidasan. He came near the child and
spoke, “Emperor, for a minute you frightened us all.”

The child laughed.

“Yes, I will frighten you. I insisted on a horse. And you people have brought a
palanquin.”

Soon the child was surrounded by familiar characters - Soman Sambavan,
Idumban Kari and Devaralan.

“Your Highness! Why one horse, we will bring a thousand horses for you one
day. But today please get into this palanquin.” – Soman Sambavan spoke with
reverence.

“No. I won’t. I will ride only on that horse.” The child pointed out to Vandhiya
Thevan’s horse.

Only then they noticed the horse and its rider.

Ravidasan’s face glowed in anger and in fear. He walked two feet ahead and
shouted at Vandhiya Thevan.

“Rascal! How did you come here?”

“Hi Ghost! How did you manage to come here from Kodikkarai?”

Ravidasan laughed out aloud.

“Oh you really thought that I was a ghost... ha ha ha ha”

“Some will become ghosts after death. And you became one even while you are
alive.”

The child intervened.

“Don’t quarrel with him. I like him very much. He gave me company when I
was alone in this dark building. He also promised to kill the tiger if it comes to
attack me. Let him come with us.”

Ravidasan went back to the child.

“Your Highness, let’s take him with us. I request you to get into the palanquin.
Just for today. Tomorrow we’ll bring the horse.”

The child started walking towards the palanquin.

Ravidasan went back to Vandhiya Thevan.

“What are you going to do now?”

“You’ll have to tell.”

“Come with us. You know our secrets already. Now you know even more. We
cannot leave you here. Come with us.”

“If I refuse... “

“Impossible. I know you are a great warrior. But remember we are twenty men
against you. You can’t escape from us.”

“You mean I can’t escape from you alive.”

“You want to die? Why? You are way too young. You have not yet tasted the
pleasures of this world. Why should you waste your life?”

“No, I am not keen on dying. Where are you going?”

“That’s a good boy. We are going to see the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur.”

“I thought so. Is she here?”

“She should have reached Thiruppurambayam by now. Are you coming with us
or not?”

“I too have to go that side. I was wondering who would guide me along the way.
Thank God, you came. Come, let’s go.”

The child got into the palanquin. It started to move. Ravidasan’s men held

torches and were walking along with the palanquin shouting some strange
slogans. Vandhiya Thevan followed them. His mind was in a state of turbulence.

‘What happened to Vanathi? What happened to Prince Madhuranthakan? What
is going to happen to me tonight?

He had no answers for any of these questions. There was no doubt that he was
going to witness a conspiracy a hundred times deadlier than the one he saw at
the Kadambur Palace on that fateful day.

‘It is good to know what they are doing... What will happen after that? Will they
let me go alive? They will force me to join their cause. If I refuse, they will not
think twice before ceremoniously sacrificing me. Even then, there is a chance. If
Nandini has a soft corner for me. .. ..

Vandhiya Thevan remembered the fact that he readily agreed to go with the evil
gang soon after Ravidasan uttered Nandini’s name.

‘Our elders call this lust. The power wielded by a beautiful woman. The
fascination provided by a woman’s body. I know very well that she is part of a
terrible conspiracy. Even then, when there is an opportunity to meet her I do not
want to lose it. Even before his mind could weigh the benefits and dangers of his
going with them his mouth had uttered a clear ‘Yes.’. But is there any other
alternative? It is not wise to fight with so many people. Ravidasan was correct. I
might find some ways to escape from this evil gang. And there is an added
advantage of knowing about this gang and its evil plans.’

Kanchi? That’s where my enemy lives. Vandhiya Thevan remembered the words

of the little boy.

Who is that boy? Why should they treat him like a King? Ravidasan addressed
him as “Emperor”. Why? Whom did the boy refer to as his enemy?

Answers started appearing in his mind. When they did, Vandhiya Thevan
shivered in fear.

Oh My God! When will all these end? ‘Very soon’ came a voice from within.

The strange procession continued on its way. It went past the fields, canals, the
farmyards, the forest and the ponds. It never stopped. Finally, the procession
crossed the Manni River, which was in spate and reached the outskirts of
Thiruppurambayam. It entered the dense forest that had grown around the war
memorial.

Chapter 35: The Time Has Come

The War Memorial (at Thiruppurambayam) built over a hundred years ago, was
now in ruins in the midst of a dense forest. It was here that Azhwarkkadian hid
once and came to know of the conspiracy of Ravidasan and his people.

Vandhiya Thevan and others had reached the memorial.

They led Vandhiya Thevan and his horse near the sidewall of the ruined
memorial.

“Stay here. Don’t move. We’ll call you at the right time. Don’t ever dream of
getting away from this place. Except for people who are familiar with this forest,
nobody can either come into the forest or go out of it. If you try to escape, you’ll
die. That’s for sure.”

Ravidasan warned him.

“Oh if at all I find a way out you’ll cast a spell on me and kill me. Am I right,
Sorcerer?” Vandhiya Thevan laughed at his own joke.

“Laugh! Laugh to your heart’s content.” Ravidasan too laughed.

A fox yelped somewhere in the forest. An owl hooted in response. Vandhiya
Thevan’s body shivered. That was not due to cold. Even the cold Northern wind
was afraid to enter that dense forest. Even rains could not pierce the thick
foliage. Only a few spots on the ground appeared wet. The air was rare and
Vandhiya Thevan felt quite stuffy. Vandhiya Thevan’s waistcloth had dried by
then. The waistband was still wet. Vandhiya Thevan spread that over a rock to let
it dry. He sat in the other corner of the same rock and leaned against the wall. A
sentry had been posted to keep an eye on him.

Others who came with him sat in a circle in a clearing. A man brought a throne
from inside the memorial and placed it in their midst. The small boy who was
addressed as “The Emperor” was made to sit on the throne. All the torches but
for two were put off. The smoke from the torches that were put off surrounded
the place.

“The Queen has not come yet.” A man spoke.

“The time has not yet come. I have asked her to come in the second three-hour
period of the night. Somebody can sing the praises of the Vazhuthi clan in the
meanwhile.” It was Soman Sambavan.

Idumban Kari started playing on a drum. Devaralan started singing a song.

Vandhiya Thevan saw the scene unfolding before him. He could also hear them.
He knew that the word Vazhuthi Clan referred to the Pandya clan.

The song was set in a tragic mood. The music and the drumbeat sort of melted
Vandhiya Thevan’s heart. He could hear only a few words of the lyrics. The song

was about a war fought more than a hundred years ago.

It was precisely at this location that a fierce battle raged between Varaguna
Pandian and Aparajitha Pallavan. The battle lasted for three days. The Pallava
King was supported by the Kanga King Prithvipathi. Prithvipathi along with
thousands of men was killed in that gory battle. The war memorial was built in
his honour. Now it had become the rendezvous of the traitors and conspirators.

Soon after the death of the Kanga King, the Pallava army scattered away in fear.
For a moment it appeared that, the Pandyas were going to win that war. The
Chozha Army came to the rescue of Pallavas. Vijayaalaya Chozhan who bore
ninety-six war-wounds on his body headed the Chozha Army. He had lost his
legs in an earlier war. Four soldiers carried the fierce old man. The old lion was
wielding two long swords in his hands. He cut through the Pandya lines keeping
the swords in a swirl. He moved the swords so fast that to the enemy soldiers it
appeared as if he was wielding a magic wheel of death. Wherever he went, the
Pandya soldiers fell by the dozen.

The scattered Pallava army returned to the battlefield. Thousands of swords
sparkled in the bright yellow light of the evening sun. When they clashed with
those of the enemies the ringing sound- jana jana janar - was heard for miles.
From another side came thousands of shining spears. The swords and the spears
clashed resulting in the sound - dana dana danaar. Thousands of heads rolled on
either side. Thousands of soldiers died and lifeless bodies were lying in a heap.
The horses neighed hard – ee ee ee ee ee - before they fell down dead. The
elephants let out a pathetic sound – blea lea lea lea - before falling down dead.
The corpses of men and animals now floated in a river of blood. Twentythousand vultures hovered over the dead bodies covered the sky. Thirty-thousand
foxes yelped and gathered near the battlefield. The death wails of fifty-thousand
men were heard from afar aiyoooooo. A hundred-thousand war cries were heard.
“Don’t leave! Chase! Attack! Kill!” Thousands of victory drums thundered –
atham atham atham atham. Twenty-thousand conches roared at the same time
“bhoom bhoom bhoom bhoom”

Ha ha ha ha! thus laughed the sixty-thousand ghosts that surrounded the
battlefield.

Vandhiya Thevan woke up with a start. He looked around. He had dozed off for
some time. He thought of the wild dream he just had. Was it a dream? No.
Devaralan was singing a song about a war scene, which was in tune with the
beating of the drum. Devaralan’s graphic description must have appeared as a
dreamy vision before him.

Devaralan’s song described how the Pallava Army and the army of the KangaKing fled the battlefield unable to bear the onslaught of the Pandya army. The
sound of the other men laughing must have appeared to Vandhiya Thevan as the
laughing of sixty-thousand ghosts. That must have woken him up. The beating of
the drum stopped. Devaralan stopped singing.

A torch was seen at a distance. It was moving towards the memorial. A
palanquin followed the torch. The palanquin bearers lowered their load. The
screens on the palanquin moved apart and a woman stepped out - the Junior
Queen of Pazhuvur, Nandini.

There was however a significant difference in her appearance. Vandhiya Thevan
had always seen her beautifully dressed, well made-up and adorning the Royal
jewellery. But now she had let her hair loose and appeared as the fierce Goddess,
Durga Devi. Vandhiya Thevan felt a shiver through his body. He had never seen
her like that.

As soon as Nandini got down from the palanquin, she saw the boy sitting on the
throne. She started walking without taking her eyes off the boy. The boy was

staring at her too. Others were looking at the woman and the boy.

The woman who came looking for the boy in the dilapidated building in the
forest, the one whom the boy addressed as ‘Amma’ was standing behind the
throne. As soon as Nandini came near the throne, she extended her hands. The
boy cast a pointed glance at her and at the woman standing behind him.

“You are my mother, right? Not this lady.”

“Yes, dear.”

“Then why does she keep on saying that she is my mother?”

“She’s the mother who brought you up.”

“Why didn’t you bring me up? Why don’t you keep me with you? Why does she
have to hide me in some godforsaken cave in the forest?”

“Only to fulfil your father’s wishes, dear. And to take revenge on those who
killed your father.”

“I know.”

The boy stood up and approached Nandini.

Nandini hugged him. She kissed him on his forehead. The boy too was hugging
her as if he would not let her go away from him again.

The scene, however, did not last long. Nandini forcibly removed the little hands
of the child and freed herself. She made the child sit on the throne. She then
went to the palanquin and pulled out the sword, the one she had when Vandhiya
Thevan saw her. She signalled to the palanquin bearers whereupon they carried
the palanquin a little away and sat there hiding from others.

Nandini walked to the throne again. She placed the decorated sword across the
throne. The boy was staring at the sword.

“Can I take this in my hand?” – The boy asked.

“Please wait, darling.”

She then glanced at Ravidasan and other men one by one.

“I hope there is nobody here who has not taken the vow.”

“No, Devi”, replied Soman Sambavan.

Nandini addressed Ravidasan as “Army Chief” and started to talk. Ravidasan
laughed.

“You are laughing today. Who knows how it will be on the same day next
month.”

“Devi, we have been waiting for that momentous day for years.”

“Listen. We are a few in numbers. Our Emperor is still a child. The Chozha
Empire is vast. Their military power is enormous. If only we had been rash and
reckless, all our efforts would have been wasted. It is only because of our
patience that we are near our goal today. Ravidasa, do you want to say
something? Anybody here wants to say something?”

Ravidasan looked sharply at the faces of those present there one by one.
Everybody seemed to have taken a vow of silence.

“Devi, we do not have anything to say. It’s your turn. Please be kind enough to
tell us where, how and through whom are we going to fulfil our vow.”

“I have come here only for that. I insisted that all of you should come because
you should know. I brought our Emperor for the same reason.”

Everybody, including the boy seated on the throne, was looking at her.

“Some of you were restless. You even doubted whether I had forgotten our vow.
Your doubt is baseless. I have stronger reasons – in fact the strongest of all
assembled here – to remember our deadly vow. No, I have not forgotten it. I
can’t. For the past three years, I have been thinking of nothing else but our vow.
I have thought of nothing else but the opportunities for taking revenge and the
ways and means of doing it. Whatever I did, wherever I went, whomsoever I
talked to I never thought of anything else but to use that as a means for our
mission. The time is ripe now. The officials and the Chieftains of the Chozha
Empire are divided into two. Pazhuvettaraiyar, Sambuvaraiyar and others are
keen on making Madhuranthakan the King. Kodumbalur Bhoothi Vikrama
Kesari and Malayaman of Thirukkovilur are dead against that proposal. I now
hear that Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari is marching towards the capital city Thanjavur
with the Southern Regiment of the Chozha Army. I also learn that the
Malayaman of Thirukkovilur is gathering a huge army. A war may break out
between the two sides any time.”

“Devi, we learn that you are taking all efforts to avoid that conflict. We also
learn that there are going to be peace talks at Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace at
Kadambur.”

“Yes, you are right. I am the one who organised the peace talks. Can’t you guess
the reason?”

“We can’t, Your Excellency. Our elders have said that even God Himself cannot
fathom the depth of a woman’s mind. What can we poor mortals do?”

“I know you can’t. I’ll tell you... Sundara Chozhan is still alive. The Chief
Minister Anbil Brahmarayan too is alive. These two people will somehow pacify
the warring factions. Even if there is a civil war and one side wins, our mission
will be frustrated. That is the only reason I have started the peace talks. Our
mission should be accomplished even before the war really starts. If I have my
way, there will be a perennial war between the various Chieftains of the Chozha

Empire. The war will not stop till the mighty Chozha Empire is destroyed. I am
sure you now know why I started the peace talks.”

Nandini’s words brought an expression of surprise and enthusiasm on the faces
of every one assembled there. They were in awe of her intelligence and started
talking to each other in whispers. Even the otherwise unshaken Ravidasan was
quite surprised.

“Splendid, Devi! We don’t have words to praise your vision and your
intelligence. Now we know the purpose of the peace talks. But, Devi, you said
that we are close to fulfilling our vow. Who is going to do that? When and
how?”

“I am coming to that. I have sent an invitation to our first enemy to attend the
peace talks at the Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace. He will come. We will have to fulfil
our vow there. O Personal Bodyguards of Veerapandiyan! The time has come.
To avenge the death of our King. To remove the stain of dishonour from your
reputation. Today is Saturday. Our mission will be completed before next
Saturday.”

The twenty people assembled there shouted at the same time. Some jumped.
Some played the drum. The owls sleeping on the high branches woke up and
flew. The bats flew across the building accompanied by a noisy fluttering of their
wings. Vandhiya Thevan’s horse shivered.

Vandhiya Thevan looked up. He could guess that Nandini was sharing some
exciting piece of information with her men. He could not hear her words.
Ravidasan raised his hands and signalled others to be quiet.

“Your words fill our minds with boundless happiness. We are excited that the
time has come to kill our first enemy so soon. But tell us Devi, who amongst us,
will have the honour of doing that great act?”

“It’s but natural that there will be a fierce competition amongst us for that
honour. I want to settle that issue without disappointing anyone. That was the
reason I had the Emperor brought here. And here we have the noble sword of our
King Veerapandiyan. Let this child choose someone amongst us to receive the
sword. The chosen one will have the honour of taking revenge on behalf of all of
us. The rest of us should be ready to help the chosen person. If the chosen person
fails in his mission, others should come forward to complete the task. I will be in
Kadambur Palace. This man Idumban Kari will be one of the guards at the
Kadambur Fort. We two will help the chosen person to enter the Palace without
any hassle. Do you all agree to this arrangement?”

The personal bodyguards of the Pandya King looked at each other with
enthusiasm. The arrangement appeared acceptable to all.

Ravidasan spoke: “You are right. We agree. There is one more thing. We should
also agree to obey the person chosen for this task at all costs. Till the Emperor
comes of age everyone else should listen to the chosen person.”

A smile flashed across Nandini’s face.

“I hope you have included me as well.”

“Yes, Devi. We can’t afford to have any exception to this rule.”

“Good. Now do all of you agree with Ravidasan?”

They looked at each other. They were hesitant to speak. It appeared as if some of
them did not agree with Ravidasan.

“No, Devi. It’s not fair. You have been giving us all the help we need for our
mission. How can we subject you to that general rule?” Soman Sambavan
objected.

“Don’t worry about me. I am holding my body and soul together only to avenge
the cruel death of Veerapandiyan. I am ready to be a slave to anyone chosen to
do that job.”

Then Nandini spoke to the small boy seated on the throne.

“Darling, this noble sword belongs to your great father. Give it to the person you
like the most.”

Ravidasan came near the child and spoke in a reverential voice.

“Your Highness, please look at each one of us. Give this noble sword of the
Pandya clan to the person who appears the most valiant and the bravest amongst
us all.”

The child-king looked around. Everybody was looking at his face. In each pair
of eyes was an expression, which begged the king “Please give the sword to
me.”

Ravidasan’s eyes and face threatened the king and told him in an authoritative
tone, “Give the sword to me.”

The child looked at every one twice or thrice. He lifted the sword.

The excitement level reached its peak. The child turned to Nandini.

“Amma, I like you the most. Till I become big you should rule the country for
me.”

With these words, he gave the sword to her.

Chapter 36: A Mysterious Figure In The Dark

Nandini accepted the sword from the boy who was called as The Emperor. She
held it close to her chest. She then lifted the boy and hugged him. Tears were
streaming out of her eyes.

Others were a little shocked at the unusual sight. Ravidasan was the first to come
out of the shock.

“Devi, the Emperor has not properly understood our request. He has given the
sword to you without understanding the implications. Let’s explain ... ..”

Nandini stopped him and spoke in a choked voice.

“No, the Emperor gave the sword to me only after fully understanding the
significance of the act. Let not my tears change your mind. These are tears of
joy, for I have been the chosen one to avenge the death of our King
Veerapandiyan.”

“There are so many of us - the King’s personal body guards, the
‘Apathuthavis’…Please think again, Devi.”

Nandini stopped Soman Sambavan from speaking further.

“There is nothing to think. The responsibility is now fully mine. But that does
not mean that you won’t have anything to do. Half of you take the Emperor
safely to the Pandava Mountain. Others come to Kadambur. Those of you who
can come in to the Palace come in. Others, be ready outside. Get some horses
that can run very fast. All of us should try to come out of the Palace alive once
our mission is accomplished.”

Ravidasan came forward.

“I forgot something important. Please allow me to share an important piece of
information with you now”

“Whatever it is be quick. We do not have much time. Pazhuvettaraiyar has gone
for the annual conference of Kalamukas at the banks of Coleroon. I have to rush
to the Palace before he comes back.”

“Didn’t you say that our first enemy, Adithya Karikalan, will come to
Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace? Well, I am not very sure about that.”

“What makes you say that?”

“I have strong reasons. A message is being sent to Adithya Karikalan not to go to
the Kadambur Palace at any cost. The Princess at Pazhaiyaarai and the Chief
Minister have sent the message.”

“Do you think I don’t know that?”

“Do you expect him to come to Kadambur even after he receives the message?”

“Yes, I do. The lady snake at Pazhaiyaarai does not know about Adithya
Karikalan’s mind. Even that devil, that Brahmarakshas, the Chief Minister, does
not know that. Even you, an expert in sorcery do not know. If somebody tells
Adithya Karikalan not to do something, he is sure to do that. I know that. Unlike
Arulmozhivarman, Adithya Karikalan won’t listen to others. Nor is he a coward
like Madhuranthakan. Adithya Karikalan will come to Kadambur for the only
reason his sister and the Chief Minister asked him not to go.”

“Devi, but don’t rely on that too much. Their message will not reach Kanchi?”

“I don’t get you.”

There was an unusual excitement in Nandini’s voice.

“Devi, do you know who is carrying that message to Adithya Karikalan?”

“I don’t know. But I can guess.”

“No need, Devi. We have captured the messenger. We saw him in the Mandapam
where our Emperor took shelter during the rain. He knows all our secrets. To let
him go back alive will be a sure invitation for disaster. Idumbankari, bring that
spy here.”

Idumbankari started walking towards the temple at the War Memorial. Two men
went with him. Nandini was looking at them. She had been furious till then and
now she sported a seductive smile on her beautiful face.

Idumbankari and the two men went near Vandhiya Thevan. An exhausted
Vandhiya Thevan had just gone to sleep. They sprang on him. For a moment,
Vandhiya Thevan thought of fighting with them. Then he changed his mind. He
was curious to know what they were up to. He remained silent and let them do
whatever they wanted. They used a long rope to tie his hands with his body.
Then the two men grabbed his shoulders and made him walk. He was dragged
and produced before Nandini.

Vandhiya Thevan smiled at her. Nandini’s face was peaceful and expressionless.

“Oh, you again... “

“Yes, Devi. It’s me again. But believe me this time I did not come on my own.”
Vandhiya Thevan glanced at the men who stood around him.

The small boy seated near Nandini spoke.

“Amma, this man saved me from the ghosts in the dark. Why is he bound?”

Vandhiya Thevan was in a mood to tease.

“Be silent, Son. You should not talk when elders are discussing. If you do, the
tiger will eat you alive.”

“I’ll eat the tiger.”

“But can a fish eat a tiger?”

The men around him let out a frightening roar. That made Vandhiya Thevan
shiver in fear.

Ravidasan spoke in a loud voice.

“Did you hear him, Devi? We should not let this fellow go alive out of this place.
We let him go on two prior occasions because you insisted. We should not let
him live any longer.”

Vandhiya Thevan sprang to action.

“Sorcerer, why are you piling lies upon lies? When did you let me go? I was the
one who let you go. Devi, please have a look at this man. Is he really Sorcerer
Ravidasan as he claims to be? Or is he his ghost?”

Ravidasan’s laugh was frightening.

“Yes, I am a ghost. And tonight I am going to drink your blood.”

This statement was welcomed with a grunt from the other men.

The boy told Nandini.

“Amma, this man has a fine horse. Ask him to give it to me.”

Vandhiya Thevan spoke to the boy.

“Son, you come with me. We’ll ride together.”

Ravidasan’s eyes glowed in anger.

“SHUT UP!”

Then he turned to Nandini.

“Waiting for your orders, Devi.”

Nandini asked him in nonchalant voice.

“When did he come here? And how?”

“He tried to abduct the Emperor from the Mandapam. Thank God, we went at
the nick of time and prevented that disaster. If only we had delayed by a second..
.“

“Are they telling the truth?” Nandini asked Vandhiya Thevan.

“Only you know whether your men are capable of telling the truth. How can I
know, Devi?”

The smile on Nandini’s face disappeared suddenly. She spoke to Ravidasan.

“Can you all move away? I want to know a few things from him”

“We are losing time, Devi. We are in a precarious position now. This is not the
time to... “

Before Ravidasan could finish Nandini roared:

“Should I remind you of the oath we took a few minutes ago - that all others

should obey the person chosen to do the job? Don’t speak a word more. Move
away! And do take the Emperor with you.”

She then whispered in the boy’s ears:

“Darling, please go with these men. I’ll get the horse for you.”

Ravidasan and his men moved away in a hurry taking the boy with them.

When they were left alone, Nandini’s eyes penetrated Vandhiya Thevan in the
dim light provided by the torches.

“I think there is something between us. Something connects us. We seem to be
crossing paths quite often.”

“You are right. Whatever connects us should be quite mischievous. For it holds
us pretty tight. So tight that it has bound my hands with my body.”

“Will you please stop joking with me? Did you come here deliberately or just
bumped in accidentally?”

“Neither. Your men dragged me here. But for them I would have reached the
banks of Coleroon by now.”

“I now realise that you are not happy to see me. And are always anxious to get
away from me.”

“No, Devi. I don’t have any trouble in seeing you. Honestly, I am a trifle sad to
go away from you. I want your permission, Devi. I know you are torn between
that old hag Pazhuvettaraiyar and these scary sorcerers. Just give me a word,
Devi. I’ll free you from the clutches of these people and take you somewhere.”

“Where?”

“I’ll take you to your mother who’s roaming in the forests of Srilanka like an
orphan.”

Nandini sighed obviously in disappointment.

“Why, do you want me too to become an orphan like her? Who knows, there
may be a time for that too. I’ll seek your help at that time. But before that will
you please help me to complete my mission?”

“Devi, I can’t give my word unless I know what your mission is.”

“Those who love me truly will not speak like that. They’d offer to help even
without knowing what’s there in my heart.”

“At times those who love will also try to caution you and save you from danger.

I am sure these crooks have done something and you are in their evil net. They
are going to use you for their work and then dump you.”

“You are wrong. I am going to use them for my purpose.”

“They have brought a small boy from forest to deceive you.”

“Do you know what the child is for?”

“To be crowned as the Pandya King. To ascend the Pandya throne.”

“Wrong, again. Not just for the Pandya throne but to rule the Chozha Empire
spread over from River Tungabhadra in the North to Srilanka in the South.”

“Oh My God! Don’t tell me you are going to do that with the help of these
cunning foxes. Do you think you can vanquish the two-million strong Chozha
Army with these ten, twenty foxes which hide themselves in the day and come
out in the night?”

“I also believe in the sword which I am holding in my hand. With this sword I’ll
fulfil my dream.”

“Devi, you are never going to use that sword. You don’t have the strength –
either in your hand or in your heart.”

“How do you say that?”

“Just a hunch, Devi.”

“I can prove you wrong right now.”

“Then I’ll consider myself very lucky, Devi. To be killed by your beautiful
hands... what more can I ask for, Devi?”

Vandhiya Thevan bent down his head and stood silently as if he were expecting
to be slain by the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur.

“Do you want to be slain by me? Or be crowned by me?”

“You have but one crown, Devi. On how many heads can you place it?”

“That’s my wish. I’ll place it on the head of that person whom I finally want to
be the King.”

“Then what will happen to this small boy?”

“It’s my wish to crown him or not.”

“As you please, Devi. I don’t want the crown.”

“Why?”

“Many people have praised my curly hair. I don’t want the crown to hide my
beautiful hair.”

“When will you learn to be serious? Okay, tell me this.What did the Princess do
on hearing about the death of Ponniyin Selvan? Was she sad?”

Nandini switched the topic.

Vandhiya Thevan was a little shocked. Then he spoke in a clear voice.

“Yes, she was sad. How can it be otherwise? Do you think every woman in this
world is heartless? I don’t think so.”

“I heard that the Kodumbalur girl tried to kill herself by jumping into the stream.
Is it true? Who saved her?”

It was only then Vandhiya Thevan remembered Vanathi’s plight. Oh My God!

Whatever happened to her?

Burdened by feelings of guilt he remained silent.

Nandini’s voice was harsh now.

“I know you won’t say anything about that. Forget it. But tell me are you going
to prevent Adithya Karikalan from coming to Kadambur Palace?”

“I’ll try my best to do that.”

“I say you can’t do it.”

“I never said I can do it, Devi. I just said I‘d try. I know if the Crown Prince
decides to do something it is very difficult to change his mind.”

“You know him very well.”

“You know him better than me.”

“Good. I know you won’t come to my side. You will always be on the side of my
enemy. Right?”

“Devi, who’s your enemy?”

“The Princess at Pazhaiyaarai. Who else?”

“That’s your imagination, Devi. I am going to tell you a truth. A very important
truth.”

“Enough of it. When you start telling the truth, I know it’d be the most blatant lie
ever told. You keep your truth yourself.”

Nandini clapped her hands. Ravidasan and others closed in. Vandhiya Thevan
thought that he had not used the last opportunity given to him to save his wife.

‘This devil is now going to order my execution. Oh My God! What an ignoble
death! How I wished to die a valiant death on the battlefield? Why should die at
the hands of these traitors?

Ravidasan and his men surrounded Vandhiya Thevan. He was like a lamb
surrounded by a hungry pack of wolves. They were grunting like the wolves of
the forest.

“Your Excellency, this man will never listen to reason. Don’t waste your efforts
on him. You leave now. We will sacrifice this man in this sacred place and then
leave this place.”

“Sorcerer Beware! That is not my wish. You should not touch this man. If any
one of you dares to hurt him, I’ll kill him with this sword and avenge his death.”

Nandini roared.

Ravidasan and his men were shocked by this sudden twist.

Nandini now talked in a pacifying tone.

“I want to use him for many things. I am leaving this place right now. You too
leave. Set this man free. Don’t block him.”

“Devi, please listen to his prayer. We are ready to execute your orders. But this
man has a horse. I don’t think it is wise to let him go first. Please think it over.”

“Good. Let him be bound to one of the pillars. It may take some time for him to
free himself. By that time you would have crossed the forest.”

Vandhiya Thevan was secured to one of the pillars of the War Memorial. His
horse was bound to a tree a little away from him. Nandini climbed into the
palanquin, which was carried by her men. Two men carried the throne.
Ravidasan and his men took the small boy with them and disappeared in the
darkness. Vandhiya Thevan saw the fading lights of the torches carried by those
men. Soon he was swallowed by darkness.

Vandhiya Thevan thought whatever happened there a few minutes ago was but a
vivid dream. Giant bats flew over him flapping their wings in utter darkness. The
owls hooted. The foxes of the forest took turns in screaming. Vandhiya Thevan
thought that the foxes were closing in on him. He could see many vague forms
moving in the forest.

He remembered the nightmare he had at the Kadambur Palace sometime ago. He
visualised a thousand foxes fighting for his flesh. He shivered in fear. He was in
a hurry to free himself. But he could not release the ropes so easily.

If there had been at least some light he could have untied the ropes easily. There
was no lightning in the sky. He could not even see the fireflies. Even if the
clouds had cleared and the stars appeared in the sky, there was no way for the
starlight to penetrate the dense forest growth.

‘But what is this noise?’

‘This is a forest and there would be so many animals. So there is no wonder that
I see some movement at a distance.’

‘No, the sound resembles the footsteps of a man.’

The horse neighed. It shifted its legs, a clear expression of fear.

‘Has it seen a tiger or something?’

Vandhiya Thevan tried to free himself once again. But nothing happened.

‘But I see something moving in darkness. It is like a dark shadow moving by
itself. Or is it a man? But what else can it be? Oh My God! The form is closing
in on me. Let me gather all my courage.’

He brought all his strength to his legs. When the dark form was within his reach,
he gave a violent kick aiming at the centre of the form. The form screamed and
sprang backwards.

As it moved a little further Vandhiya Thevan heard a distinct sound of two hard
substances clashing against each other. The form must have hit the wall of the
War Memorial.

The form stood there for a while. It appeared as if the form was leaning on the
wall. Though Vandhiya Thevan could not make out anything in the dark he had a
feeling that that the form was seeing him.

He tried once again to release himself. Those devils had made very strong knots,
which were almost impossible to untie.

‘I should complain to Ravidasan when I meet him next.’

The form started moving. It appeared to go into the Memorial. Vandhiya Thevan
heard the sound of two stones clashing against each other.

Then he could see some light at the gate of the temple. The form was now
holding a shrub, which was burning. And it was moving towards him. It was a
Kalamuka. A Saivite fanatic. The form had long hair and sported a long beard. A
garland of human skulls adorned its neck. The form came near Vandhiya Thevan
and saw his face in the light.

Chapter 37: Identity Revealed

Vandhiya Thevan was a tad frightened to see that ghastly looking Kalamuka
Saivite at that time and at that godforsaken place in the middle of a dense forest.
And then his natural courage took over.

‘I have seen this fellow somewhere. Oh, now I remember! When I was sleeping
under a tree near the Harichandra River two persons were staring at me. This
man is one of the two. But is that all? Have I seen this face just once? Have I not
seen those sharp eyes anywhere else?’

The Kalamuka Saiva stared at Vandhiya Thevan and started laughing loudly.

‘I have heard this voice somewhere.’

“At last is that you? And to think that I suffered so much to come here at
midnight... only to see you.... “

When the Kalamuka spoke it appeared as if he was straining himself to talk in a
different voice.

“You came for somebody else? Who is it?”

“The Prince.”

“Which Prince?”

“Why are you concerned about that?”

“I too am a Prince.”

“Does a Prince have a funny face like yours?”

“My face is all right. It’s your face that stinks. Do you think if I had the beard,
the moustache and this ghastly garland made of skulls, my face will look
handsome?”

“Why don’t you try?”

“How long will it take to grow the beard and the moustache?”

“That’s not a big deal. It can grow in a day. And if needed even in less than an
hour.”

“I too thought so.”

“What did you think?

“Nothing. Release me from this bondage. I’ll join your group.”

“Enough of that! I already suspect that there are a few spies like you in our
group. That’s why our deliberations in our Conference today ended in that note.”

“What note?”

“We waited for the Prince to come. We all thought he would come and promise
us that as soon as he becomes the King he would make our Acharya the Raja
Guru. But the Prince did not come at all.”

“You first release me from my bonds. I’ll tell you why the Prince did not come
to your Conference.”

“Which Prince?”

“Who else but Prince Madhuranthakan, the son of Kandaraathithar?”

“My guess is right.”

“What did you guess?”

“I guessed that you are a spy.”

“How?”

“When I came looking for the Prince I saw somebody leaving this forest. I know
who they are. They must have suspected that you are a spy. That’s why they have
left you bound. But I am surprised why they did not kill you.”

“I will explain. But first release me from these bonds.”

“You need not tell anything. Nor will I ever release you. But if you promise me “

“What promise?”

“Promise me that you won’t interfere in other’s matters and promise me to do
hundred and eight push-ups right here.”

“Oh, is that the matter?”

While this conversation was on, Vandhiya Thevan’s hands did not remain idle. It
was slowly untying the ropes that bound him to the pillar.

By the time the Kalamuka could complete the sentence “you should do hundred
and eight push-ups”, all the ropes were off and Vandhiya Thevan was free.

He sprang on the Kalamuka Saiva and pushed him down. The torch held by the
Kalamuka dropped but the fire was not put off. A faint light was coming from it.

Vandhiya Thevan sat on the Kalamuka’s chest and pulled his beard hard. It came
apart. The Kalamuka pushed him off and stood up.

Vandhiya Thevan lifted the torch which was in the final stages of its life. In that
dim light the face of that gory Kalamuka sans his hair and beard looked exactly
like the face of the Vaishnava fanatic, Azhwarkkadian. Both were smiling at
each other.

"My Dear Vaishnava, you advised me not to poke my nose in matters that do not
concern me. And you don’t listen to your own advice.”

“Yes, I did. But I was not caught like you. If only I had not come.. “

“Do you still think that you released me from these bonds?”

“Yes, you did that yourself. But if you attempt to go out of this forest without my
help you’ll become a feast to the foxes.”

“Leave the foxes. If only you had seen the sorcerer foxes assembled here
sometime ago... It’s a miracle that I escaped alive from those cunning beasts.”

“I know those sorcerers. Were there only the sorcerers or was somebody else
too?”

“A small fish came. A rare variety of fish which wants to eat a tiger.”

“Oh, Come on, tell me. Who else came here? What happened? Please don’t
leave out any details.”

“You first tell me why you chose this disguise? Where were you in the evening?
What happened there? If you tell me everything then and only then I’ll tell my
part.”

“I don’t have much to say. I came to know that there was going to be a great
conference of Kalamukas at the early hours of the night. I wanted to know what
they were going to do. So I opted for this disguise. My plan was to meet you at
the boat jetty soon after the conference in the wee hours of the morning. The
Leader of the Kalamukas had also come. But the one person whom they
expected the most did not turn up.”

“Did they expect Prince Madhuranthakan?”

“How the hell did you know?”

“If Madhuranthakan ascends the Chozha throne we’ll have wonderful
governance!”

“Why do you say that?”

“He could not even rein in an unruly horse. How the hell can he control
Chieftains like Pazhuvettaraiyars, fanatics the Kalamukas who are prone to
revolt and the Vaishnava fanatics who always want to fight?”

Azhwarkkadian laughed.

“Did you see Madhuranthakan on the way? Do you know what happened to
him?”

Vandhiya Thevan told about his following the Prince when the latter’s horse,
frightened by the torch, took flight and about his attempts to look for the Prince
and his finally seeing the horse in the farm yard.

Then he added in a soft voice:

“Poor man, the horse must have dumped him somewhere. His life might be in
danger. That was the reason he could not make it up to the Kalamukas’
Conference. Can we go look for him?”

“Wonderful! Why should we bother? Let’s attend to our work. Come let’s go.

We need to be at the boat jetty at River Coleroon before dawn.”

“If Madhuranthakan lies dead in some canal or field... do you say even then we
should not bother?”

“Impossible. That won’t happen. The Chief Minister would have provided for
that.”

“Does he know about these things?”

“Aha! That’s a dumb question. Nothing can happen in this Empire without his
knowledge.”

“Oh, so he knows about the meeting of the Conspirators that happened at the
Kadambur Palace?”

“Do you remember seeing the palanquin of the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur at the
festival at Veeranarayanapuram? We were standing under a tree… “

“Why not? I can’t forget the excitement you had as soon as the screens parted. I
remember your asking me to deliver a letter to the Junior Queen.”

“And you responded... “Chi.. What’s this?’ as if I were giving a love letter to her.
Do you know that I wanted to caution Madhuranthakan against the conspirators?
It was the Chief Minister’s Orders... “

“Did you know that Madhuranthakan was in the palanquin?”

“I doubted at first. My doubts were cleared when the screens parted. But you are
a cunning fellow. In spite of my repeated requests you refused to reveal the
identity of the person who was in the palanquin.”

“You are no less cunning. You never told me where you were planning to go this
evening.”

“If I had told, you would have insisted on coming with me. See what have you
got into. At least in future..... . “

“Does the Chief Minister know about the conference of Kalamukas and about
Madhuranthakan taking part in it?”

“Otherwise he would not have sent me. And he made sure that Madhuranthakan
did not go there. You said somebody lifted the torch, right? He must be the Chief
Minister’s man. He would have made the horse mad and flee from there.
Somebody must have seen the Prince lying on the ground. By this time he would
be going to Thanjavur on a palanquin or a chariot. Come, let’s go.”

“Vaishnava, I won’t come.”

“Come on, what happened to the commitment you made to the Princess? I hear
that Adithya Karikalan has already left Kanchi. Unless we go fast we can’t.... “

“You can deliver the letter to Adithya Karikalan yourself. Unlike
Madhuranthakan he won’t come dressed as a woman. Nor will he ever travel in
cognito.”

“What are you going to do?”

“Actually I did not follow Madhuranthakan. I followed somebody else and then
saw Madhuranthakan accidentally on the way.”

“I will hazard a guess. You were following a woman.”

“You are a bad fellow. I am going to break your head first.”

“Impossible, dear. I have already pledged my head to a Kalamuka. Ok, let it go.
Who’s that lady?”

“Kodumbalur Princess. She had come to the Kudanthai Astrologer’s house. Then
she travelled all alone in her palanquin. In fact I did not follow that crazy
woman. Her palanquin was travelling on the same road that I was about to go.
Suddenly some men surrounded her palanquin and attacked her attendants. They
bound her maid to a tree and have abducted the Princess. Vaishnava, I don’t want
to come with you without knowing what happened to that poor girl.”

“Why are you so concerned about that girl?”

“Hey come on. Don’t you know that she is the daughter of the Junior Velar who
laid down his life for the Empire at the Lankan war? She is the best friend of
Princess Kunthavai. I also hear that she might get married to Ponniyin Selvan.”

“But Ponniyin Selvan is already dead. What’s the point in discussing his
marriage?”

“How can you be so sure that he’s dead? It’s all guesswork.”

“Then do you think that he is alive?”

“Vaishnava, if it’s your intention to pluck words from my mouth, forget it. I am
not going to say one word about him.”

“Ok, Ok. I know you are a very astute fellow. But don’t worry about Vanathi.
You know that she is dearer to Kunthavai than her own life.”

“That’s why I am worried. Perhaps the Princess does not know about Vanathi’s
fate.”

“If she does not know today, she’ll know tomorrow.”

“What’s the use then? If the Kalamukas sacrifice that virgin girl tonight…. “

“Do you mean to say that Vanathi was attacked by the Kalamukas?”

“It appears so. Her maid told me so.”

“If that’s true you need not worry at all. The Kodumbalur clan belongs to the
Kalamuka society. If the Kalamukas knew that Vanathi hails from the
Kodumbalur clan, they will treat her like a queen.”

“Oh My God! How come I did not know that?”

“You know that’s why they oppose Prince Madhuranthakan.”

“What if these skull-ascetics oppose him?”

“You don’t know. Almost all the big names in this Empire belong to the
Kalamuka society. There are many Kalamukas in the army too. That was the
reason Pazhuvettaraiyar arranged for the meeting today. He wanted to seek the
support of Kalamukas for Madhuranthakan. Because a horse went mad nothing
happened. Now tell me, are you coming with me or do you want me to go
alone?”

Vandhiya reluctantly stood up and took charge of his horse. They found a narrow
way through the dense forest “Look there!” Azhwarkkadian pointed out to the
sky.

The comet was shining bright. Its tail was brighter than usual and covered half of
the sky. Cold winter wind dashed against his body. His body shivered in fear. A
dog from a nearby village let out a pathetic howl. It appeared as if the dog was
crying for somebody.

Chapter 38: What Happened To Vanathi?

The sun had set a little while ago. Darkness enveloped the road. Vanathi’s
palanquin was on the road that connected Kumbakonam to Thiruvarur. She was
confused. She was yearning to go the Choodamani Buddhist Monastery and
serve the ailing Prince Arulmozhivarman. Her idea was fine; but when she dwelt
on the details, she felt overwhelmed.

‘How is that possible? Will the Buddhist monks let a young girl walk into their
monastery? Even if they did, can I see the Prince? Even if I see him, will I be
allowed to serve him?’

There was also a lurking fear in the corner of her mind. She was travelling alone
to Nagapattinam. She tried her best to drive away the fear and infuse courage in
her weak mind.

‘Nothing is easy in this world. I can’t imagine the kind of suffering people
undergo to accomplish something in this bad, bad world! And that boat-girl rows
her boat all by herself in the mighty ocean. What courage, my God! Inclement
weather, incessant rain, raging storm! At times she has to row on the waves
which rise as high as the mountains!

She saved the Prince! What courage! Here I am shivering in fear over this little
journey! What foolishness! I don’t have to enter the Choodamani Monastery. Let
me stay somewhere close-by and pay attention to any news concerning the
Prince’s health. Let me at least meet that boat girl! Yes, that’s what I should do
now. I should get to know that girl. May be I can see the Prince through her.

I will have to express my love towards the Prince one way or the other. Once I’ve
done that, I’ll be happy to die. Or renounce this worldly life and become a
Buddhist nun.’

Vanathi wanted to know from the palanquin bearers when they would reach
Nagapattinam. She parted the screens and looked out. She noticed somebody
hiding behind the tall trees on the roadside. She recognised them as the
Kalamukas, the Saivite Fanatics. She was not concerned. Nor was she afraid of
them. When she grew up in the Kodumbalur Palace, the Kalamukas used to visit
the Palace quite often. They used to talk to her Uncle and get whatever help they
wanted. Even their Head Priest had once visited Kodumbalur. He was accorded a
grand reception. Special poojas had been organised to mark the occasion. Her
Uncle, Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari had created several endowments to provide food
to Kalamukas. So she was sure that Kalamukas would not harm her. Who knows,
perhaps they may even help me, thought the Princess.

Vanathi knew about the Conference of Kalamukas happening on that day. She
remembered seeing the members of the group while coming to Kudanthai from
Pazhaiyaarai.

‘But why are they hiding behind the trees? It’s quite possible that they might hurt
me without knowing who I am.’

As she was thinking, the Kalamukas came out and surrounded her palanquin.
Even then she was not afraid. She wanted to tell them who she was. As she was
exploring the ways to reveal her identity she saw two men tying her maid to the
tree. She could not help screaming.

One of the Kalamukas wielded a long trident right before her face. “Shut up girl.
Don’t’ shout. If you don’t scream we won’t harm you. But if you do, we’ll kill
you with this trident. Mind it!”

Vanathi gathered some courage.

“Do you know who I am? I am the daughter of the Junior Velar of Kodumbalur.
If you touch me you’ll be destroyed.”

She thought she was courageous. But there was an unmistakable shiver in her
voice.

“We know everything. We were waiting for you. Will you keep your mouth shut
for some time? Otherwise... “. He dangled the trident in front of her face.

She heard the sound of a whip cracking and somebody screaming in pain. She
knew the palanquin bearers were being beaten up the fanatics. Vanathi got wild
and wanted to jump down from the palanquin. She could not do that because the
bearers had lifted the palanquin again and were running fast. The Kalamukas
were also running along. The Kalamukas were shouting while running. So even
if Vanathi screamed nobody would have heard it. She realised there was no point
in screaming. Nor was it possible for her to jump from the palanquin when the
bearers were running fast. And if she succeeded in jumping she would be in the
midst of these fanatics. Now she was plainly curious to know where was she
being taken and for what.

After running for about fifteen minutes, they stopped near a Durga Temple
which was hidden behind some trees. By that time it was completely dark. One

man ran into the temple and brought a flaming torch. He showed it before
Vanathi and spoke in a harsh voice.

“Hi Girl, tell us what we want to know. We promise you we won’t hurt you.
We’ll drop you wherever you want to go.”

Vanathi got suspicious.

“I don’t know anything. What do you want to know?”

“Girl, we know that you are travelling alone to meet someone close to you. Who
is he?”

Vanathi’s worst fears were confirmed. A big change happened in her. Till that
second she was a doe who could be frightened by the slightest of noise. And now
she was a lioness who did not fear a thing in the whole world.

“It’s none of your business. Who the hell are you to ask about somebody close to
me? No, I won’t tell.”

The Kalamuka laughed.

“You need not have to tell us, girl. We know. You are travelling all alone to see
Prince Arulmozhivarman. Tell us where he is hiding. We promise you we won’t
hurt you.”

“Do whatever you want to. You can’t get anything from me.”

“Are you saying that we can do anything with you? If only you knew our plans
for you, you would not have uttered those words.”

“What are you going to do to me?”

“For starters we’ll burn one of your soft flower-like hands with this torch. Then
the other hand will also have a similar fate. Then we’ll light your beautiful hair
and burn it... “

“You are most welcome. Here’s my hand. Bring the torch near me. Come on,
quick!”

Vanathi knew all about the betrayals, conspiracies and double-crossings
happening at the high places in the Empire at that time.

‘These crooks must be the henchmen of the conspirators. They are hell-bent on
knowing about the Prince’s hiding place. Probably they want to hurt him. If I am
subject to this kind of a torture for the sake of the Prince, for the sake of his life
and security, there cannot be a girl in the whole world who’s more blessed than
me.’

It was this thought that endowed her with that unusual courage.

“Girl, think it over. Don’t be adamant. You’ll be sorry. You’ll be blind for the
rest of your life.”

“Burn me inch by inch. Cut my flesh. I won’t speak a word.”

“Then relax and watch the circus. Hey, disciple, come on bring the torch here.”

Vanathi’s attention was distracted by a long procession coming towards them.
There were elephants, horses, infantry and palanquins in that procession. Vanathi
knew that divine intervention had come at last to save her from the clutches of
those fanatics.

“Beware! Look up!” Vanathi pointed out to the procession. The Kalamuka
laughed again.

He asked her, “Do you know who’s coming?”

“Looks like Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar. If I scream now they’ll hear
me. This is your last chance to escape. Run away. Otherwise... “

“You are right, Girl. It’s the Chief Minister. It was only on his orders that we
caught you and brought you here.”

Vanathi was shocked. Even without her knowing a terrible scream was about
escape her mouth. She tried to suppress the scream with her hands.

Chapter 39: The Elephant’s Salvation

Vanathi had remained in her palanquin. The bearers placed the palanquin on the
ground. Vanathi stepped out of it. She was looking at the procession approaching
her. Kalamukas too were looking in the same direction. They became quiet. An
eerie silence reigned in the area punctuated only by the croaking of the frogs and
the sound of the tree-branches swaying in the Northern winter winds.

Vanathi had no idea of running away from there. She knew perfectly well that it
was impossible. Yes, she could have tricked these Kalamukas; but definitely not
the Chief Minister, Anbil Aniruddha Brahmarayar. She could not think of
running away from him even in her wildest dreams. His intelligence, his
astuteness and his political manoeuvring were famous throughout the Empire.
And the whole world knew about the tremendous influence the man had on the
Emperor.

The ladies in the Pazhaiyaarai Palace used to gossip about the Government
Officers and the Chieftains of the Empire. Even the influential ladies living in
the Palace were afraid to gossip about the Chief Minister. They all knew that
even the softest whispers made in the inner most ladies’ chambers in the Palace
would somehow reach the ears of the shrewd Minister.

The Chozha Emperor was quite kind; normally he would condone any lapse. But
even he would not forgive anybody who slandered the Chief Minister who was
very dear to him.

Vanathi knew the respect and adoration Prince Kunthavai had for the Chief
Minister. She expected help and protection from the celebrated Minister. But

when the Kalamukas told her that she was imprisoned only on his orders all her
hopes were shattered.

Why should the powerful Minister order the capture of this orphan? Perhaps the
Kalamukas are lying. Or perhaps the Pazhuvettaraiyars are coming. Or perhaps
Madhuranthakan and his retinue. Whoever it may be, I will never reveal what I
know about Prince Arulmozhivarman. Whatever may happen to me, I won’t talk.
Even if they threaten to kill me I won’t open my mouth.’

Vanathi regained her lost composure

I’ll show them who I am. I’ll show them that I hail from the most valiant
Kodumbalur clan and that nothing can frighten me. I’ll also show them that I am
the best friend of Princess Kunthavai.

The long procession came to a stop. A palanquin was moving away from the
procession. As soon as it moved closer to Vanathi and was lowered to the
ground, the Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar got down from the
palanquin.

He signalled the bearers to stay back. He then looked at Vanathi as if he never
expected to see her there, of all the persons.

“Surprise of surprises! Is this a dream or what? Is the graceful lady standing
before me the Princes of Kodumbalur? The darling daughter of Paranthakan
Junior Velar who gave his life for this Empire at the Lankan war?”

“Yes, Sir. I hope I too am not dreaming. Is the one standing before me the great
Anbil Aniruddha Brahmarayar, the Chief Minister of the Chozha Empire, the
person who lives in the heart of Chozha people, the most revered and respected
person in the Kingdom?”

“Devi, I am happy that you know me. That makes my job quite easy. I need not
trouble you much.”

“Aha! You need not worry about that, Most Respected Sir. I won’t mind being
troubled, hurt or harmed by somebody as great as our Great Minister.”

“Your words please me, my dear. My intention is not to disturb you more than
what is absolutely necessary. I am going to ask you one or two questions. I’ll be
happy if you answer them truthfully. Then..... “

“Sir, before you do, let me tell you that I too have a few questions.”

“Please go ahead, Devi. I am like your father. And I consider you as my
daughter. A few days back I met your father’s elder brother, General Bhoothi
Vikrama Kesari in Mathottam in Srilanka. He requested me to look after you as
my daughter. And I have promised him to do so.”

“Thank you. Thank you a lot, my dear father. I lost my father when I was a child.
The Chozha Emperor once promised me that he would be my father. And now I
have another father in the Great Chief Minister. Tell me sir, what else do I
need?”

“Didn’t you want to ask something? Please do it fast, dear. The grey clouds are
gathering. It looks like we are going to have a heavy rain.”

“My dear father, your darling daughter was going in a palanquin on this road.
These Kalamukas blocked my way, abducted me and have brought me here. Did
you order them to do so? Was it you who ordered them to torch the hands of this
innocent orphan girl? These crooks are pointing their hands at you. But I don’t
believe them.”

“My dear child, what they say is true. They did those things on my orders. If it’s
wrong then I and I alone am responsible.”

“The Greatest Minister, the world has ever known! I am surprised. You say, ‘If
it’s wrong’! You are well-versed in our ancient scriptures. You are responsible
for enforcing the law and order in this great Empire. Even if the Emperor were to
act against the dictates of justice, you have the right and the responsibility to
admonish him and lead him to the right path. And if you do not know whether a
particular act is right or wrong, tell me, Sir, who else in this land will know? To
abduct an innocent girl going about her way on the country’s road, to keep her in
a secret place and to threaten her with torture – is it right or wrong? And if you
do not know yourself who will you ask? I had heard the Chozha roads are safe
even for women travellers under the reign of our Emperor Sundara Chozhan. I
had also heard that those who hurt a woman would be given the harshest
punishment. And now it is quite surprising to know that the Chief Minister of the
Empire does not know whether the act is right or wrong.”

The normally eloquent Chief Minister was nonplussed. He tried to intervene
while Vanathi was talking but he could not. He now hardened his voice.

“Wait! Don’t display your eloquence to me. I do have my reasons to doubt

whether what I did was right or wrong. It all depends on your answer to my
question. News came to me that a lady who has a classified secret is travelling
on the Nagapattinam Road. I ordered my men to stop her. They just obeyed my
orders. Perhaps they may be wrong. Instead of apprehending the lady who knew
too much, instead of capturing the woman involved in sedition, they might have
by mistake apprehended you after you came out of the Kudanthai Astrologer’s
house. Daughter dear, tell me your travel plans. Was it your original plan to
return to Pazhaiyaarai from Kudanthai? And the bearers took you on the
Nagapattinam Road by mistake? Assure me my dear that you were not planning
to go to Nagapattinam to meet a proclaimed offender, somebody who is working
against the interests of the Empire? If you prove me wrong, what my men did to
you was also wrong. I too have a role in that. Now tell me girl, what’s your
answer? Let me be frank. Were you going to Nagapattinam to have a secret
meeting with Prince Arulmozhivarman?”

Vanathi was devastated. And then furious. If only she could she would have
burnt the Chief Minister alive. But she also knew that there was no point in
exhibiting her strong emotions. The innocent, gullible girl somehow suddenly
had the ability to dwell deeply on any issue. And she became quite astute in a
matter of seconds. She did not directly answer the Minister’s question.

“What is this you are talking, Most Respected Sir? Are you accusing Prince
Arulmozhivarman of sedition? Is it not a crime to talk about the darling son of
our Emperor in such a derogatory manner? What you are doing is nothing but a
conspiracy against the entire Chozha clan. I should tell this to Princess
Kunthavai immediately.”

“You are most welcome to do it, Devi. If you answer my question you need not
stay here even for a second. It will be my duty to take you to the Princess.”

“And if I don’t answer your question?”

“You don’t have that option, Devi. You can’t get away from this old man so
easily. You will have to answer my question.”

“Most Respected and Omnipotent Chief Minister, Aniruddha Brahmarayar! You
can’t get any information regarding our Prince from this poor, powerless girl.
Even if I am scorched as these agents of death threatened a little while ago I
won’t part with any information. ”

“The Princess Born of The Most Valiant Kodumbalur clan! I admire your
determination. But what you said is not right. You said you won’t tell about the
Prince. But you have already unwittingly parted with some crucial information.
So there is no harm in telling me something more. My job will be easy.”

Vanathi was shocked. Did I unknowingly say anything? She suddenly felt that
she was being strangulated. Her body shivered in fear. No, I did not say
anything. This old man is trying to deceive me. Perhaps this is another trick to
lure the information from me. She felt a little more courageous now.

“Sir, the mouth that uttered the holy Vedas should not lie. The Chief Minister of
the great Emperor Sundara Chozhan should not invent facts and build an
imaginary story. I haven’t mentioned anything about the Prince.”

“Please reflect on what you said, Devi. You can part with crucial information
even without openly talking about it. Let me tell you what information I culled
from your words. Everybody knows that Prince Arulmozhivarman was drowned
in the sea. The people, the authorities and the Chieftains are all immersed in the
sea of grief. Don’t tell me you don’t know that. Now in this context if you say, ‘I
won’t say anything about the Prince’ what does that mean? It could only mean

that you know very well that he is alive. And you did not refuse when I said that
you are going to Nagapattinam to see the Prince. You did not say, ‘How can I
meet the dead Prince?’ Nor did you say, ‘I am not going to Nagapattinam, but
somewhere else.’ So you have admitted that the Prince is alive and that you are
going to see him at Nagapattinam. I want only two more details. Tell me where
exactly in Nagapattinam is the Prince. And what is the source of your
information. And once you give those details to me then you need not even
spend a second more talking with this old man. You are free to go wherever you
want to.”

Vanathi lost hear bearings. The Chief Minister was after all speaking the truth.
The plain, hard truth. She felt that she had betrayed the Prince by her
foolishness.

Is there an atonement for what I did? No, not at all! Yes, there is one way. To die.
To quit living. To lay down my life.

“Sir, you told me that you are the best friend of my father’s brother. You also
told me that you love me like your own daughter. I now beg of you. I don’t want
to go to Nagapattinam or Pazhaiyaarai.”

“Then? You want to go to Kodumbalur? That’s quite logical. I’ll ask my men to
take you there with proper protection.”

“No, Sir. I don’t want to go to Kodumbalur either. I want to go to the other
world. To leave this bad world for good. Will you please tell you men to
sacrifice me on that altar over there? I am ready to die right now.”

“Devi, I have promised to fulfil your wishes. If you want to go to the other world
then let me send you there. Even then, you will have to answer my questions
before you start on your journey.”

“Please do not torture me any further. I am not in a mood to answer your
question. You told me that you love me as your daughter. If that’s true.... “

“There is no doubt about it, daughter dear. I consider you as my own daughter.
Perhaps you may not know how close I am to your family. My friendship with
your uncle is a good forty years old. But I won’t let any kind of friendship or
relationship to interfere with my duties as a Chief Minister. When it comes to the
affairs of the state there are no fathers, daughters, friends or relatives. Why go
that far? Just look at our Emperor! Didn’t he order his own son to be arrested
because the Prince was conspiring against the State?”

“Are you by any chance talking about Ponniyin Selvan? Tell me, Sir, what
conspiracy did he commit against the State?”

“Don’t tell me you don’t know that. Ponniyin Selvan went to Srilanka to fight
for the Empire. Our forces defeated the Lankan army. The Prince abused his
position and tried to grab the Lankan throne for himself. Is that not an act of
betrayal? Is that not a conspiracy against the State? Is that not sedition?

“Our Emperor ordered that the Prince be arrested and brought back to the
capital. The Prince went against the orders of the Emperor. He jumped into the
sea and swam to safety. He also managed to spread rumours that he was
drowned. He is now at large. You did not know the background. That’s why you
refused to divulge where he is. Let me warn you, my girl, if you try to help the
Prince you’ll be charged as an accessory to the crime. You will be also charged
with the crime of harbouring a proclaimed offender. And that crime is no less

than that committed by the Prince. So please tell me, where is the Prince?”

Vanathi could no longer hold her emotions in check. The pent up anger burst
forth. She could not bear Ponniyin Selvan being slandered by the Chief Minister.
The soft-spoken doe transformed into a lioness and roared.

“Sir, whatever you have said is not true. You are maligning the Prince without
any basis. All your accusations are baseless. Frivolous. Ponniyin Selvan went to
Lanka at a time when our soldiers there had lost the enthusiasm to fight. And it
was because of the Prince that they regained their vigour and fought with valour.
The whole world knows that it was because of Ponniyin Selvan that we won the
war in Srilanka. His valour and his noble qualities endeared him to the people of
Lanka. They hated their own King who like a coward fled from the battle scene
and wanted to make our Prince their King. The Buddhist Monks offered the
Lankan throne to Ponniyin Selvan. But the Prince refused it. And you have
chosen to malign such a noble and an upright man.

Once the Prince knew that his father wanted to have him arrested he offered
himself to be captured and came back to Thanjavur. And he did not jump into the
sea to escape from arrest. That was again a noble act to save his dying friend. He
never conspired against the State or the Emperor. I must have committed a lot of
sins in the past. For, I would not have had the misfortune of listening to such
harsh words against such a kind man.”

Aniruddhar’s smile was benevolent.

“Look girl, do you know what people will think if they hear your vociferous
support for Prince Arulmozhivarman? They’ll say that you two are lovers.”

“Most Respected Sir, only half of it is true. It’s true that I have given my heart to
him. I don’t want to hide that from you. But I don’t think he has a place for this
orphan in his heart. The mythological Anril bird can fall in love with the moon.
But the moon does not even know that the bird exists and loves him.”

“Aha! I never knew that my friend’s daughter is such a great connoisseur of
poetry. It’s not surprising. Aren’t you the best friend of Princess Kunthavai?”

“Enough! Enough! I am not interested in hearing your flattery. Either let me go
or ask your men to kill me.”

“Patience, my dear, Patience. You know so many things about Ponniyin Selvan.
So you must know where he is now. Please tell me the place. I’ll send you to
your uncle. He is returning from Srilanka. He should have reached Madurai by
now.”

“Respected Sir, somebody who is friends with a treacherous man like you cannot
be my uncle. He cannot be my relative. I don’t have any friends and relatives in
the world. Whatever I told about the Prince, the whole world knows. You can’t
get any other information from me. There is no point in holding me any longer.”

“I too agree that there is no point in delaying any further. Looks like it’s going to
rain.”

“Not just rain, there’s going to be lightning, thunder, storm and even deluge.
They are bound to come in a place where people like you are there.”

As if to concur with Vanathi, there was a flash of lightning across the sky. As
soon as it vanished and the place was enveloped by darkness, there was thunder
which shook the sky and the earth.

“Girl, let me ask you for one final time. Tell me where is Prince
Arulmozhivarman?”

“No, I won’t tell.”

“My guess was right. You are carrying a secret message to the Prince who is
hiding in Nagapattinam. True or not?”

“No use asking questions, Sir. I won’t answer any of your questions.”

“Then I am left with no choice but award you the punishment usually given to
those who are guilty of sedition.”

“Sir, I am eagerly waiting. Do you want me to place my head on the altar over
there?”

“No. You are a warrior’s daughter. And that too, the daughter of Kodumbalur
Chieftain. It’s not fair to punish you so mildly. Do you see the elephant over
there?”

Vanathi looked in the direction pointed out by the Minister. There was an

elephant which looked like a dark hillock. It appeared as if the huge beast was
made of stone and painted in black. The darkness of its skin was beautifully
contrasted by the two shining white tusks.

“Devi, you might have heard the story of the salvation of the elephant, Gajendra
Moksham. If not, let me remind you. Once an elephant, an ardent devotee of
Lord Vishnu was caught by a crocodile. Vishnu himself appeared in response to
the cries of the elephant, killed the crocodile and gave salvation to Gajendra, the
elephant. To express its gratitude, this Gajendra sent so many people to the
heaven where Vishnu lives. I heard you saying that you wanted to go to the other
world. This elephant will fulfil your wishes. If it lifts you by its trunk and
throws you away you will land straight into heaven.”

The Chief Minister laughed aloud as if he was pleased with his own speech. The
sound of his laughter frightened Vanathi. She was shivering in fear. She thought
that the Minister was not a man but a demon in the form of a man.

“Princess, I’ll give you one final chance. Are you going to reveal the
whereabouts of Ponniyin Selvan or are you going to go to heaven through
Gajendran’s trunk?”

Surprisingly these words gave a rare strength to Vanathi.

“Sir, are you going to ask the elephant to come near me or should I go there?”

Aniruddhar gave a signal. And then he spoke in a language which Vanathi could
not understand. The elephant walked towards Vanathi making the ground
tremble by its weight. Its long trunk went around Vanathi’s body, which was

softer than a flower. The pachyderm then lifted her up.

In those few seconds several thoughts arose in the mind of Vanathi. They were
like consecutive waves appearing on a turbulent ocean. She was surprised about
her own courage.

Princess Kunthavai used to call me a coward very often. If only she were here to
see how I handled this situation, won’t she be surprised? Happy? One day or the
other she will know this incident. She will know that I bravely laid down my life
for Ponniyin Selvan. She will tell that to the Prince as well. And what will the
Prince think of me? Will he be convinced at least then that the Kodumbalur
Princess was any day more valiant than that boat-girl?

Vanathi was slowly going higher and higher in the air.

Yes, whatever that Brahmarakshas Aniruddhar said is true. This Gajendra is
going to send me to heaven. It’s going to throw me to death in a few seconds. I
won’t be conscious when I fall. By that time I would be dead.

Vanathi was now above the elephant’s head. She closed her eyes. The tusker
swirled its trunk. It was ready to throw away the Princess. Vanathi became
unconscious at the nick of time. That was a blessing.

Chapter 40: Anaimangalam

One of the major weaknesses in Vanathi’s character was her frequent fainting.
She would faint whenever she was overwhelmed either by happiness or grief.
The development of events on that fateful day clearly indicated that it was the
last time she fainted. She had been permanently cured of her illness.

When Vanathi regained her consciousness she first felt like swinging in the air
and then travelling through space. ‘Rim Rim Jim Jim’ this was how she heard the
raindrops falling all over her. When cold winds hit her body she shivered. She
thought that she was going to the celestial world through the clouds. She was
surrounded by darkness punctuated by occasional flashes of lightning.

She remembered the Chief Minister talking about Gajendra Moksham or the
liberation of the elephant. She also remembered the elephant placing its trunk on
her waist and lifting her off the ground. Whatever the Chief Minister said had
happened.

‘My life in this world is over. I am now going to the celestial world where I am
going to meet the gods and goddesses. But I will not be able to able see the one
god whom I love. If I could not see him what is the big deal in going to the
heavens?

Oh! Why there is so much jolting? But the place where my head rests is quite
soft. Very soft. Very comfortable. Very cosy. I feel like resting my head on my
mother’s lap. It also feels like the lap of the Princess, who loves me more than
my mother. Oh, that reminds me of that angel. Kunthavai should be in
Pazhaiyaarai now. I don’t know what she is doing now. Has the news of my death

reached her?

I am going to the celestial world through the clouds. I don’t know in what kind of
vehicle I am going. Is this the mythological Pushpak Vimaan, celebrated in our
ancient Puranas? Or is this the white elephant, Iravatham, the vehicle of the
chief of gods, Devendra? Oh My God! Even the mere word elephant makes me
feel the raw fear. The huge beast and its highly flexible trunk! And Oh My God,
the beast has immense strength in its trunk. Ok, whatever has happened has
happened. What is the use in being sad or afraid, now? It is all over.

But the place where my head rests feels soft like the finest of silks. Why? I can’t
see anything because of the darkness. Let me try to feel with my hand. Oh, it
looks like the silk screen cloth. A little wet.

Oh My God! Who is touching my cheeks? The hand is as soft as the tender
jasmine flower.

"Vanathi, Vanathi”

“Akka, is that you?”

“Yes, it’s me. Who else?”

“You too are coming to heaven?”

“Why are you in a hurry to go to heaven? Are you bored of your life here on
earth?”

“Then where are we going?”

“What happened to you? You have forgotten everything. We are going to
Anaimangalam.”

“Where? Come on, come again...”

“What happened to you, my dear? We are going to Anaimangalam. We are
travelling on an elephant.”

“Oh My God! Elephant again...”

“Oh Crazy Girl, why are you trembling? Are you afraid even of the word
elephant?”

“Akka, did I fall asleep a little while ago?”

“Yes. The gentle swaying of the elephant should have done the trick. You had a
blissful sleep.”

“No, Akka. It was not bliss. I had many nightmares.”

“I also thought so. You were saying something.”

“What did I say?”

“You were talking of Kalamukas, sacrifice, altar and Gajendra Moksham! Then
you talked about an elephant’s trunk. And then condemned the Chief Minister
Aniruddhar as “an evil man” and “a hardened sinner.” Well, he deserves that. If
only he heard whatever you said while sleeping he would lose his sleep for many
days.”

“Is that really a dream, Akka?”

“Really a dream? An apparent contradiction of words. How can the dream be
real? How can the reality be a dream? If there is a real dream is there something
like a ‘false dream’? But how do I know about your dreams?”

“The Kalamukas captured me. The Chief Minister asked me about the Prince. I
refused to divulge the information. Then he ordered the elephant to throw me to
death. But even at that time I remained fearless and unshaken, Akka. And I
thought of you, Akka. I wished you were there to see my courage.”

“You were courageous at least in your dream. I am happy about it.”

Vanathi remained silent for a while and said, “I can’t believe it.”

“What is that you can’t believe?”

“I can’t believe whatever happened is a mere dream.”

“At times dreams will be intensely real. I have had such dreams.”

“Tell me about your dreams.”

“My brother comes in my dreams quite often. It has been several months since
he went to Lanka. But the moment I close my eyes he stands before me.”

“You are really fortunate, Akka.”

“Fortunate, my foot! Do you know the state of my mind ever since I knew that
he jumped into the sea?”

“Tell me that too is another bad dream. Or is that real?”

“How I wish it were just a dream. But that’s true, Vanathi. The person who saw
it with his own eyes told me. How can I not believe him?”

“I suppose you are talking about the warrior of the Vana clan. Didn’t he say
something else about the Prince? About the boat-girl and the Choodamani
Monastery at Nagapattinam?”

“That should be part of your dream. Yes, you were blabbering something about
Poonkuzhali and the Choodamani monastery. You also said that you wanted to
become a Buddhist nun. I am surprised what made you hate this worldly life.
Why should you become a nun?”

“Akka, don’t you know what’s in my mind? Once I heard that he was drowned
in the sea I lost all interest to live. It could have been much better if my dream
were real and the elephant had lifted me by its trunk and had thrown me to
death.”

“Oh My God! What will happen to me if you too leave me?”

“Your case is different, Akka.”

“I know. You love Arulmozhivarman more than I do. Am I right?”

“No, Akka. I didn’t mean that. I am not as bold as you are. After his death... “

“Shut up. Why do you use that word? Why should you talk about his death? Do
you know that for sure? May be the Pazhuvettaraiyars, the Queen of Pazhuvur
and that idiot Madhuranthakan are celebrating over that news. Why should you

and I talk about it? Or even think about it?”

“What are you saying, Akka? What else could have happened when he jumped
into the sea and that too when there was a storm? If he is alive wouldn’t he have
come to see you by now?”

“Crazy girl if somebody jumps into the sea it does not mean that he is drowned.”

“If he had reached the shore we should have known it by now.”

“Do you know my father’s story? Nobody knew where he was during his young
days. That was for several months. And then one fine morning they found him
and brought him home to be made the Crown Prince. My grandfather Arinchaya
Chozhan vanished after the war at Thakkolam. He was found only after several
years. Listen to me, Vanathi. Once Mother Cauvery rescued my brother from
almost certain death. I am sure that Samudraraja should have done the same
thing. There are many islands between our shores and the Lankan border.
Arulmozhi might be in one of those islands. I started on this journey with you
only to supervise and if possible speed up the search operations. Looks like you
have forgotten everything. Ever since you heard the news about the Prince I
think you have lost your mind. Only now you have started talking sense.”

Vanathi was silent for some time and then asked:

“Sorry, Akka. Where are we going now?”

“To Anaimangalam.”

“Where is it?”

“It’s almost on the sea shore very close to Nagapattinam. You were saying
something about some Choodamani Monastery in your dream. Anaimangalam is
very close to that monastery. In case you still want to become a nun the place
will be logistically convenient for your mission. But don’t be in a hurry to
become a Manimekalai (a character in an epic by that same name who
eventually became a nun). You can take a call on that after we know for sure
what happened to Ponniyin Selvan.”

Kunthavai smiled.

“But why are you laughing, Akka? How do you have the heart to do that? Are
you so sure that the Prince is alive?”

“If I had lost my hopes do you think I will smile? Or talk like this? I am quite
sure that the predictions I heard about my brother are going to become true. The
conch and disc lines on my brother’s hand will not lie. Whatever happened
happened for good.”

“What good, Akka? I can’t see any good in what’s happening.”

“You too are going to know. In due course of time. You have almost gone crazy.
The astrologers predicted that Arulmozhi will have to face many dangers when

he is young. What they predicted is coming to pass. Then the other predictions
will also have to be true.”

“What are the other predictions?”

“I have told you a hundred times. Why do you want to hear them again? Try to
grab some sleep. We can continue the discussion in the morning.”

Vanathi was lost in thoughts for a while.

“Are we going to travel on this elephant all night? What for?”

“Oh, you have forgotten even that? If we travel in the day we’d be surrounded
by people. “Where’s Ponniyin Selvan?” they would ask. “What happened to our
darling Prince?” they’d demand. They’d try to accuse the Pazhuvettaraiyars.
They’d curse the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. They might even talk ill of the
Emperor. Why should we hear those words? And the Pazhuvettaraiyars might
even accuse me of instigating the people to violence. Only to avoid all those
unpleasantness I started in the night. I explained this to you when we started at
Pazhaiyaarai. But you have forgotten everything and you are asking me again. I
think you have lost your mind. I will have to take the help of the monks at the
Choodamani Monastery to cure you of your mental illness. Now try to have
some sleep. I also feel sleepy. And tonight we have to manage to sleep on the top
of this moving mountain.”

Vanathi decided not to open her mouth again. She was confused. She tried to
organize her memories about what happened on that eventful day. The events
appeared very real.

"No, I’ve not lost my mind. Akka is trying to make me look crazy.’ She thought
about what happened after the pachyderm lifted her by its trunk. She could not
remember anything.

What could have happened? Akka should have come at the nick of time and
saved me. Seeing her, the Chief Minister should have trembled in fear and let her
go. Even then is it possible to save somebody from an elephant’s trunk? But was
that the same elephant as the one I am riding on? She remembered seeing the
howdah on the elephant. Perhaps the Princess should have been in that howdah
already. The beast lifted me, all right. But instead of throwing me away to sure
death it might have placed me on the howdah. I have seen some trained
elephants doing that. Perhaps the Chief Minister and the Princess conspired
against me. But why? To prevent me from travelling alone?’ Or perhaps to test
my courage? I remember the Princess testing my courage with a toy crocodile. I
ought not to have started on this fateful journey alone. Now lying in Akka’s lap I
feel protected. And her words infuse courage and enthusiasm in my tired mind.
There is no doubt that Ponniyin Selvan is safe somewhere. Perhaps I might meet
him at the end of this journey.

The last thought filled her mind with feelings of love. She had moved from the
deepest pit of depression of the greatest height of happiness in no time.

The elephant was swaying majestically as it walked along. The howdah was
moving in harmony with the elephant’s movement. Armed guards were walking
in the front as well as in the rear. The pouring rain degenerated into a drizzle and
then stopped completely. The clouds were dispersed. And then the stars popped
out.

Vanathi saw the stars through the roof of the howdah. She wondered whether
there could be any relationship between the stars and the lives of the people on

this earth.

‘The astrologers have been telling that there is perfect harmony between the star
in which I was born and the star in which Ponniyin Selvan was born. Is that
true? Not just the astrologers but even the Princess says that the son born out of
my womb will rule over the three worlds. Will that come true?

People believe that the appearance of a comet is a precursor of some great
calamity. To what extent is that true?

If that’s true what will be the calamity? Is it Ponniyin Selvan losing his life in the
sea? Akka strongly believes that he is alive. Will he come back alive? And if he
did what other calamity could befall the royal family?’

Vanathi dozed off to sleep. The day had dawned when she woke up. The birds
were singing. The Princess was awake. The Princess parted the screens and then
announced, “We have reached Anaimangalam. We have reached the entrance of
the Chozha Mansion.”

The two Princesses got down from the elephant and entered the mansion. The
maids at the Royal mansion were expecting them. They took them in and
showed them the various parts of the mansion. Finally they were at the ground
floor and were looking at the canal that went into the sea.

“Akka, you said that you are going to make arrangements to look out for the
Prince.”

“Yes, Vanathi. All arrangements have been made. Look there. A boat is coming
towards us. The people in the boat may bring some news to us.”

Vanathi turned around to have a look. She could see a small boat coming in the
small gap between the tree-branches.

“Who’s coming in that boat?”

“The one who is rowing is Chendan Amudhan. Do you remember, we released
him from the underground dungeons sometime ago? The woman sitting by his
side is Poonkuzhali.”

Vanathi shivered for no reason. “Akka, I don’t want to see that girl. Let me go
in.”

“Why are you afraid of her? Do you think she’ll eat you alive? Don’t worry. I am
there for you. Stand straight. Don’t fear.”

The boat came near them.

How was Vanathi saved from almost certain death when she was in the clutches
of an elephant? Her second guess was right. The elephant did not swirl its trunk
to throw her away. Instead it lifted her and gently placed her near the howdah.
Kunthavai was behind the screen ready to receive her. She hugged an
unconscious Vanathi and made her lie on her lap.

Then the Chief Minister also got into his palanquin.

“Devi, it’s time to take leave. May you have a pleasant journey. And may your
journey bring happiness to all of us.”

“Thanks a lot for your kind help, Minister.”

“And you called the Kodumbalur Princess a coward? I have never seen a more
courageous woman.”

“She was a coward till very recently. I don’t know how she got so much courage
all of a sudden.”

“It’s all because of your training, Princess. The girl will be thinking of me as a
heartless demon. That’s okay. There are so many people who do not think kindly
of me. And I am not concerned. Take care, Devi.”

His palanquin and four guards started going towards the West while the
Elephant, the horses and the other soldiers started walking towards the East.

A few minutes after the Chief Minister resumed his journey it started to rain. The
palanquin bearers and the guards did not mind the rain. They kept walking at
their usual speed. When the rain subsided into a drizzle the palanquin came to a
stop.

“Why did you stop?” – The Minister asked.

“My Lord, there’s somebody there under the tree.” The guard who was going in
the front answered.

The Chief Minister looked in the direction pointed out by him. There was a
lightning flash.

“Yes, somebody is there. Let me have a look.”

When the Minister got down from the palanquin and went near the man he heard
him moaning in pain.

“Who is that?”

“Oh, is that the Chief Minister?” The responding voice was extremely weak.

“Yes, it is. But who are you?”

“Can’t you recognise me, Sir? I am Prince Madhuranthakan.”

“Oh My God! What’s this? How did you come here? What happened?”

The Minister tried to lift Madhuranthakan from the ground.

Chapter 41: Madhuranthakan’s Gratitude

The Chief Minister gently touched Prince Madhuranthakan. The Prince
screamed in pain.

“Oh! Oops! I’m dead. Please don’t touch me. My legs! They are gone!”

The Chief Minister abandoned his efforts to lift him from the ground.

“What happened to you, Prince? What happened to your legs?”

“They are broken. I can’t walk. I can’t even stand.”

The Minister turned around and barked orders at his men.

“Bring the palanquin here.”

Then he talked softly to the Prince.

“How did this accident happen? Why are you lying here and that too in pouring
rain? What happened to your retinue? How did they dare to desert you in the

middle of nowhere? No punishment will be adequate for the offence of
desertion.”

“Chief Minister, there is no need to punish anybody. No one is guilty. It was I
who left the Palace on a horse back in the evening. As I was going along the
banks of the river there were sudden rains. There was a flash of lightning
followed by a loud thunder. The horse was frightened and started to run amok. I
was caught in the branches of this tree and fell down from there. I don’t know
where the horse is. I don’t know whether my bones are broken. It may be just
cramps in my legs. Thank God you came here at the right time.”

“Yes, Prince. It’s all because of the good deeds of your father, the saintly
Kandaraathithar that I happened to pass this way. If you please bear your pain for
a few seconds I’ll have you lifted to the palanquin. Let us go to my home at
Nathankoil. Let me hear your story when we reach there.”

The palanquin was brought near the Prince. The Minister gently lifted the Prince
and made him lie in the palanquin. He ordered the bearers to be gentle while
carrying the Prince and to avoid too much of shaking and jolting. The Minister
started to walk by the side of the palanquin.

Alittle later they reached a village called Nathankoil otherwise known as
Sundara Chozha Vinnagaram. The Minister owned a mansion in that village near
the main Vishnu Temple. Prince Madhuranthakan was taken into the mansion
and was made to lie on a comfortable cot. Lamps were brought in. The Prince’s
legs were examined. It was found that there was no fracture and that the Prince
suffered only from cramps.

The fear in the mind of the Prince had subsided. The Prince and Minister partook
of the offerings from the Vishnu Temple.

“Prince, sleep well. You can do whatever you want tomorrow. I am going to
Thanjavur. If you come with me it will be my responsibility to take you safely
back to your home.”

“Chief Minister, you have wronged me in several ways. But what you did today
has more than compensated for all those wrongs. I’ll never forget your help. I’ll
be grateful to you forever. In case I sit on the Chozha throne I assure you that
you’ll be my Chief Minister.”

The Chief Minister put up a show of being surprised by the words of the Prince.

“Oh Prince! My duty is towards the Chozha clan. My duty is to provide advice
and help to anybody who belongs to this great clan. So there is no need to single
me out for thanking. But I do not understand your statement that I’ve wronged
you. To the best of my knowledge I have not done anything against you. And if
you are kind enough to explain I’ll try to make suitable amends.”

“You are very smart, Honourable Chief Minister. Super intelligent. The whole
world knows that you are a great master in the game of politics. But don’t try to
be smart with me. I have been hurt by you. Many times in the past. Don’t feign
ignorance. But I will forget your wrongs because of what you did to me today. If
there is any other way to further express my gratitude please let me know.”

The Chief Minister smiled.

“Yes, my dear Prince. There is certainly a way in which you can express your

gratitude. This old man now seeks a boon from you. I request you not to venture
into horse riding alone. When you travel make sure that you are surrounded by
your retinue both in the front and in the rear. The best way is to travel by a
palanquin. Times are bad, Prince. The people of the Empire are agitated due to
various reasons. You saw it today with your own eyes in Pazhaiyaarai. It’s better
to travel in a closed palanquin. It will be even better if it is the palanquin of the
Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. Nobody will suspect anything.”

Madhuranthakan was stunned. Fear returned to his face. He struggled to
compose himself and then blurted out: “How dare you, Chief Minister! How
dare you suggest that I travel in Junior Queen’s palanquin? Why are you
insulting me?”

“Oh Prince! I never thought that you will consider travelling in Pazhuvur
Queen’s palanquin an insult. From when did you start thinking like that? You
used to travel in that mode quite frequently. Perhaps after the trip to the
Kadambur Sambuvarayar’s Palace this new idea should have come.”

Madhuranthakan was shocked even more. Panic spread across his face.

“Chief Minister ... I. I... Kadambur Palace.... I... “ He started to say something.

“Prince, didn’t you go to Kadambur Palace on the 18th day of Adi along with
our Chancellor the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar? I clearly remember your travelling
in the Junior Queen’s palanquin. Well, honestly I don’t like that. Young men like
you should always travel on an elephant or on a horseback. But you need proper
training to ride a horse. Once you are healed of this injury I will make
arrangements for that.”

“Beware! Aniruddha Brahmarayar, Beware! You are heaping insults on me.
Mind it. Because there was a riding accident today you can’t conclude that I
don’t know horse riding at all. Because I travelled once in a palanquin you tell
me that I regularly use the Pazhuvur Queen’s palanquin for my travel. In view of
your age and in view of your invaluable help I got from you today I am
pardoning you.

“Oh Prince! I am pleased by your patience. Our proverb says ‘The patient ones
rule the world’. The greatest of Tamil poets, Thiruvalluvar says in one of his
couplets,

“Like the land which bears those who are digging it it’s our duty to bear those
who are insulting us.’

The land not only bears its offenders. It gives them pure water. Those who want
to rule the earth should have this quality of the earth. Even if old men like me
utter something improper it’s but proper for the likes of you to bear it.”

“What are you talking about? Are you by any chance accusing me of a desire to
rule this Empire?”

His lips quivered. His eye brows arched. His fear manifested as anger. Impotent
anger.

The Chief Minister was unruffled.

“Oh Prince, why do you think that as an accusation? If you want to rule this
Empire how can that be an offence? For you are born in the clan of the greatest
of warriors, Vijayaalaya Chozha. You are the dear son of Saint Sivagnana
Kandaraathithar. You have every right to ascend the Chozha throne. How can
your aspiration for the Crown be an offence? If somebody tells you that such an
aspiration is an offence and that you can win over the Crown only by
conspiracies and behind the scene activities, please do not believe them.

“Prince, please listen to this old man. Your parents had something else planned
for you. For a while you accepted their plan and engaged yourself devotional
activities. Your mind has changed now. That does not give a right to anyone to
accuse you. You can lay a claim to the Chozha throne. You can express your
desire to the Emperor. Instead of doing that your coming alone in dark on a New
Moon night seeking the support of the Kalamukas does not look nice. There is
absolutely no need for such clandestine activities. Likewise there is no need to
congregate at the Palace of Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar like a band of thieves and
conspire against the Emperor. Remember those who advise you on these lines
are your worst enemies. Beware of them, Prince.”

Madhuranthakan was surprised and confused. The Chief Minister knew virtually
everything about him. While a part of his mind was experiencing feelings of raw
fear another part was experiencing fury born out of his fear.

“Minister Sir, how did you know all these things? Tell me which traitor acted
like my friend and gave information to you?”

“There is no point in trying to know about my sources. Remember I have eyes
and ears everywhere. Nothing can happen without my knowledge.”

“Does the Emperor know about these things?”

“No, He does not. My eyes and ears have informed me many things, most of
which are still in my heart. Unless the occasion warrants they won’t come out.”

“Yes, yes, I know your heart holds many dangerous secrets. And if only they
came out the whole Empire will be shaken. Right?”

There was malice in his voice. The Minister noticed it but did not show.

“The Emperor is my best friend. Even then my heart holds secrets which he
himself does not know. Sundara Chozhan is sick. And his heart is already
broken. There are several reasons. I don’t want to hurt him more by complaining
to him about the conspiracy of the Chieftains of the Empire. And there is no
need to do that. Prince, I will never say anything about your activities to the
Emperor. You can trust me.”

“Honourable Minister, what’s the reason for this sudden love on this innocent
Madhuranthakan?”

The Prince’s laugh was derisive.

“Prince, my love for you is not a sudden phenomenon. I love you like I love the
sons of Sundara Chozhan. So far I have not had the opportunity to show my love
for you.”

“And you got that golden opportunity today, right? When I fell down from the

horse and broke my legs you had an opportunity to demonstrate your love for
me. If only this had happened sometime ago you would have wrung my neck
and killed me on the same spot.”

“Narayana! Narayana! What’s this, Prince? What are you talking?”

“Please do not think that I don’t know anything. Don’t think I am so gullible that
I’d believe whatever nonsense you choose to deliver to me. You started working
against me even while I was in my mother’s womb. You made arrangements to
kill me the moment I was to be born. I see a sign of surprise on your face.
Aren’t you surprised to know how I know all these things? Don’t think you are
the only one in the Empire who has eyes and ears everywhere.”

The Chief Minister’s face now wore a look of real surprise. A sign of shock and
astonishment appeared and vanished in no time. And then with a strained smile
he began to talk.

“Yes, Prince. I was proud. But now my pride has gone. If there had been
arrangements to kill you soon after you birth how come you are alive today? If
you can share that secret as well I’ll be grateful to you, Prince.”

“Are you by any chance testing the extent of my knowledge? Good. Let me
reconstruct the events for you. Those who had planned to kill the child did not
even bother to check whether the child was a boy or a girl. They carried it away
to be killed; but at the last moment they found that the child was a girl. They
came running to you. You did not want to kill a girl child who will not be a
threat any way. So you asked them to give the child to a priest in the temple. I
was born a few minutes after the birth of the girl. We were twins. You never
expected that twist. My stars were in the ascent. That’s why I survived. Your
plans failed. Even after that you tried in all possible ways to prevent me from

becoming a King. You arranged to bring me up as a devotee, as a madman. Well,
I did not become fully mad as you wanted me to be. My Dear Chief Minister,
why do you look stunned? Are you by any chance going to deny these charges?”

The Chief Minister was really stunned. After a while he composed himself and
spoke softly.

“Prince, when you know so much what’s the point in my denying it?”

“Yes, there is no point. I know why you were suddenly so fond of me. You hate
the Crown Prince, Adithya Karikalan. You had planned to make
Arulmozhivarman the King. Because Arulmozhi is now dead you are leaning
towards me. Let me make one thing very clear. I’ll forget whatever wrong you
did to me earlier. And I will be grateful to you for what you did now. And if you
promise to be on my side I will make you my Chief Minister as soon as I
become the King.”

“Prince, your words make me happy.”

Chapter 42: The Fever subsided

Ponniyin Selvan was lying on a wooden cot in a room adjacent to the room of
the Chief Monk at the Choodamani Monastery in Nagapattinam. He had
remained unconscious for three days when his fever ran high. The monks took
excellent care of him during this period. Medicines were given at the prescribed
intervals. They poured water in his mouth frequently to avoid dehydration.

The Prince became conscious occasionally and during those times he tried to
figure out where he was. The painting on the wall opposite to him attracted his
attention. There were several types of celestial beings –Devas, Gandharvas and
Yakshas. Some of them were playing musical instruments. Some of them were
holding fans normally used in a King’s court. Others were bearing royal
parasols. Some others were holding plates which contained colourful flowers.
The scene was very natural. The images were surreal.

Ponniyin Selvan, who was seeing the painting on and off, thought that he had
actually died and had reached the celestial world. And that the celestial beings
had gathered there to welcome him to heaven. He wondered how he reached
heaven. He vividly remembered the way to heaven. Yes, he should have come
through the canal which had dense screw-pine bushes on both the banks. He also
remembered smelling the sweet fragrance of the screw-pine flowers. Two angels
had brought him to heaven. One was a man and another, a woman. The man was
a devotee of Lord Shiva. He sang sweet devotional songs from the compilations
Devaram. But what was the other angel doing? He clearly remembered that she
did not sing. She spoke one or two words rarely. Even those words appeared like
celestial music to his ears. There was intense love in her eyes. What happened to
those angels?

Perhaps even Buddhist Monks had a place in heaven apart from the Gandharvas

and Kinnaras, thought the Prince. Perhaps the monks were guarding the Elixir of
Life there in heaven. A monk used to come to the Prince every now and then. He
poured small doses of the Elixir of Life into his mouth every time he came near
him. Whatever may be the other pleasures and luxuries in the celestial world his
thirst was quite intense. He longed for a little more of whatever elixir the monk
poured into his mouth at regular intervals. Why were they so miserly even in the
celestial world?

Perhaps it was not good for one to have all the elixir in one go. But was it really
some elixir? Or some alcoholic drink? No, the monks would never touch
anything that had alcohol in it. And would never give that to somebody else. But
why is it that I almost faint soon after I drink that elixir? Why is my
consciousness slowly slipping away from me soon after the drink?

For three days Ponniyin Selvan was alternating between the celestial world and a
state of absolute vacuum or shunya as the Buddhists called, where there was no
trace of consciousness. He woke up on the fourth day as if from a long sleep. He
was fully conscious. His body was still weak. But his mind was fresh and active.
He was now sure that what he saw before him were mere paintings on the wall.
He now knew that the celestial beings in the paintings were not there to receive
him; but to receive Buddha when he left this world to go there. On another wall
he saw a painting which showed Buddha travelling on the clouds on his way to
heaven. Now he knew that he was lying in a Buddhist monastery. And when he
tried to identify the location of the monastery he remembered the chain of events
starting from the time he left Lanka. He remembered till the time when he and
Vandhiya Thevan were struggling for life on a turbulent ocean. He clearly
remembered his hands becoming tired. But what happened thereafter was not
clear.

A monk came to that room. As usual he came with a cup holding the ‘elixir’. He
looked at the Prince. The Prince extended his hand to get the cup from him and
then examined its contents. He was now sure that the liquid was not some
celestial elixir but milk. Or some medicine mixed with milk.

He addressed the monk:

“Swami, what is this place? Who are you? How long have I been lying like
this?”

The monk did not respond. He went out of the room. He ran into the adjacent
room and spoke to somebody there.

“Acharya, the fever has subsided. He is fully conscious now.” The Prince heard
these words.

A little later another old monk entered the room. He too looked at the Prince
deeply into his eyes. He then smiled and started to talk.

“Ponniyin Selva, you are now in Choodamani Monastery at Nagapattinam. You
came here three days ago with high fever and in a state of delirium. We are really
blessed to serve you.”

“I too am fortunate, Swami. I have wanted to come to this Choodamani
Monastery for quite some time. Once while passing through the way to the Port I
saw the monastery from outside. It’s by divine grace that I was able to stay here
for some time. Can you please tell me Swami, how did I come here?”

“Prince, please have the medicine first. I’ll tell you whatever I know.”

The Prince finished the medicinal drink in one gulp.

“Swami, this is not medicine. But the elixir of immortality. You have taken a lot
of pains to cure me of my disease. But I am not going to thank you for that.”

The Chief of Monks smiled.

"Prince, there is no need to thank us. Lord Buddha has ordained that to take care
of the sick is the greatest act of love. Buddhist Scriptures even require us to take
care of the sick animals. So we did not do anything out of the way in treating
you. We are all indebted to the Chozha clan. Your father Sundara Chozhan and
your elder sister, the Princess, have done a lot for the cause of Buddhism. We
also know that you have ordered to renovate the Buddhist monasteries in
Anuradhapura in Lanka. Considering what we have been receiving from you and
your family we don’t expect any thanks from you for this small help.”

“You got me wrong, Acharya. I never meant that. I know how severe my fever
was. I have seen the condition of people who had this epidemic in Lanka. Left to
myself I should have gone to heaven by now. Perhaps I might have been
received by gods, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Kinnaras. Today I would have living
in the midst of gods and goddesses tasting the real elixir. I would have been in a
state of bliss. You have spoilt my party. You have dragged me from the gates of
heaven to this treacherous earth. So I don’t think you did anything good for me.
That’s why I said I am not going to thank you for what you did to me.”

The Chief Monk’s face blossomed into a big smile.

“Ponniyin Selva, When it is time for you to go to heaven the chief of gods,
Devendra and other angels will come in celestial vehicles and take you to their
abode amidst great fanfare. But that time is far, far away. You have a lot to do on
earth. And you should not even think of your journey to heaven till you finish
your work on earth.”

Ponniyin Selvan sat up on his bed. His face shone with a rare kind of beauty.
Light waves emanated from his beautiful eyes and filled the room with light.

“Acharya, what you say is true. I want to do a lot of things on earth. I want to do
some great things while I am still alive. I saw this Choodamani Monastery from
outside. I saw the monasteries and sthoopas of Anuradhapura. I want to rebuild
this Choodamani Monastery on the lines of Abhayangiri Monastery in
Anuradhapura. I am going to install large statues of Buddha in this monastery.
As large as what I saw in the monasteries in that island nation.

I am going to renovate the Shiva temples of this Empire on the same lines. After
seeing the gigantic monasteries and sthoopas in Lanka I am ashamed to see our
temples and monasteries. I am going to build a huge temple in Thanjavur – so
huge it would be that its towers would kiss the sky. I am going to make a Shiva
Linga that is commensurate in size with that of the temple and install it there.
Hereafter in this Chozha Empire the temple-towers and sthoopas will compete
with each other in touching the skies. People born in this divine Tamil country
after thousands and thousands of years will be amazed by the architecture. “

After the passionate speech the Prince fell down on his bed fully exhausted. The
Chief Monk held his shoulders to ensure that his head did not hit the hard
surface. He gently made him lie down on his bed. He placed his hand
affectionately on the Prince’s forehead and spoke softly:

“Prince you will do those great things in due time. But for that you need to be
completely healed first. Please be patient till then.”

Chapter 43: Nandi Mandapam

The Chief Monk came to see Ponniyin Selvan the next day. The Prince had been
restless. There were a million questions in his mind. The junior monk who
regularly attended on him did not have answer even for one of them.

“You will know from our Acharya in due course, Your Highness.” The junior
monk did not swerve even an inch off from this refrain.

The Chief Monk enquired about his health.

“Swami, my body does not let me rest in peace. It has a million questions and a
million commands. ‘Why are you lazing around? Get up and run. Ride on a
horse. Jump into a river and swim a mile. Fight with an elephant. Don’t be idle.’
My body is urging me to do something. My stomach too is very active.
Whatever food the junior monk brings in is barely enough for me, Swami. I can’t
even believe that I had a high fever and remained unconscious all these days.
Your medicines are wonderful, Swamiji.”

“Prince, don’t take whatever your body says at face value. It will be like this
when the fever comes down. But if you are careless there might be a relapse
which might even endanger your life.”

“Swami, I am not daunted by the dangers to my life.”

“You may not be, Prince; but we are. Millions of people are. They have been in a
state of grief for the past four days. The cities and the villages are restless.
Everyone from children to old people are crying, Your Highness.”

“Swami, I don’t understand. Why should they grieve? Do they think that perhaps
I may not recover from this fever? When they know that I am in Choodamani
Monastery under your excellent care why should they grieve?”

“Oh Prince, they do not know that you have fever and you are recouping at
Choodamani Monastery. If only the people of this city know do you think this
place will be peaceful like this? Will they not pull down the walls of this
monastery and come running to see you? If only you had heard the screams and
wails of the people when they heard that you were drowned in the sea.... There
was not even a single soul in this monastery who did not shed tears for you,
Prince.”

Ponniyin Selvan sat up on the bed.

“Gurudeva, what are you talking? I don’t understand a single word. Was there
news that I was dead? When did it come? Who brought that terrible news?
Why?”

“I don’t know who brought the news. One morning the news spread like wildfire
throughout this city. It was said that the ship you travelled from Lanka to
Kodikkarai coast was caught in a whirlwind and sank. The Chancellor, the
Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar, started a massive manhunt to find you. He could not
even get your body, said the people. That made the people infer that you died in
the sea. Even I was standing at the gates of monastery plunged in grief. At that
time a monk came running to me to inform that a boat had come to the back
gates of the monastery and that there was a very sick person on board. I ran to

the canal and found out that it was you. Then we started the treatment which has
been going on for the past three days. And you became conscious only
yesterday.”

“Acharya, do you know who brought me here?”

“A young man and a young woman.”

“I vaguely remember as if in a dream. Do you know who those people are? Is the
young man a warrior from the Vana clan called Vandhiya Thevan?”

“No, Your Highness. They told me that his name was Chendan Amudhan.
Looked like a staunch devotee of Lord Shiva. I don’t know the name of the
woman. She was a strong woman – physically and mentally.”

“I can guess who she is. She is the boat-woman by name Poonkuzhali. Daughter
of Thiyaga Vidangar. Did they tell you why I was brought here?”

“No, Prince. Nor did I ask them.”

“Didn’t you tell anybody that I am safe here?”

“No, Your Highness. Those who brought you here told me that I should never
reveal anything about you. Considering your health condition I too thought that
it was prudent to keep your stay here a guarded secret.”

“Acharya, I smell something wrong in the whole arrangement. My father, the
great Emperor had ordered that I should be arrested and brought back home.
Obeying his orders I started from Lanka immediately. So many things happened.
Now it appears that somebody wants to accuse me of violating the orders of the
Emperor. And that somebody has conspired to manage whatever that happened
after I left Lanka. They also spread rumours that I was drowned in the sea.
Gurudeva, even your accepting me in Choodamani Monastery will be seen as a
serious offence – that of sedition. And to continue to keep me here will be a
greater crime. Please send me back to Thanjavur immediately.”

“Prince, if I am punished by a Royal decree for having kept you here I’ll gladly
accept the punishment. Even if it results in this Choodamani Monastery being
razed to the ground I don’t care.”

“I am moved by your love, Gurudeva. But I am wondering how you accepted me
blindly without enquiring those who brought me here.”

“What’s the need to enquire? What greater duty do we monks have than
attending to someone as seriously sick as you were? Your sister Kunthavai had
cautioned us that you might come here for a few days’ stay.”

“Oh really? Did the Princess say that? When?”

“A few days before you were brought here. Chendan Amudhan also told me that
you were brought here as per your sister’s wishes.”

“Gurudeva, what happened to those two? The ones who brought me here? Have
they gone back? Can we find them? I want to know some details from them.”

“There’s no need to panic, Your Highness. Those two are here in this city. They
visit here every day to enquire about your health. I don’t know why they haven’t
come today.”

Ajunior monk gave a sign to the Chief.

“Excuse me, Your Highness.”

The Chief Monk ran outside.

When he back he saw the Prince even more anxious.

“Acharya, I won’t stay here for a second more. I don’t want to be charged with
the offence of going against the words of the Emperor seeking asylum in a
Buddhist monastery. I don’t want this ancient Choodamani Monastery be harmed
on my account.”

The Acharya smiled.

“To be honest I too can’t bear the burden any longer. I don’t want to hold you
here against your wishes. You may leave right now. A boat is waiting for you at
the canal.”

“Where will the boat take me?”

“That’s something you will have to decide. Those who brought you here have
come with a boat to pick you up.”

The Prince hesitated. There was a mysterious smile in the Acharya’s eyes.

‘Is there something more than what meets the eye?”

“Have they both come? Didn’t they tell you the reason?”

“They did. If you sail for thirty minutes you’ll reach a place called Nandi
Mandapam on the canal bank. They told that two ladies are waiting there to see
you.”

The Prince jumped from the cot.

“Acharya, please take me to the boat. Right now. Oh My God! It’s already late.”

The monk held the Prince in his hand and slowly walked him to the canal. The
Acharya could not feel the weakness of a person who had been lying in fever for
four days in Prince’s body. When Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali saw the
Prince walking in his usual majestic gait their faces lit up in broad smiles.

As soon as Arulmozhivarman boarded the boat the Chief Monk told him:

“If we get another opportunity to serve you we, the monks of the Choodamani
Monastery, will consider it as a great privilege. Please do come again and stay
with us for a week so that your recovery will be complete.”

“Gurudeva, I’ll come back. Otherwise I would not have left you all in a hurry
without taking proper leave of the other monks.”

As soon as the boat started moving the Prince looked alternately at Chendhan
and Poonkuzhali.

“When you brought me through this canal I thought you were some celestial
beings and were taking me to heaven. You deceived me. You took me to a
monastery instead. I want to hear from you what happened ever since I became
exhausted by swimming in the sea. But before that tell me who is waiting for me
at Nandi Mandapam.”

Arulmozhivarman asked both; but Poonkuzhali remained silent. Chendan
Amudhan replied that Princess Kunthavai and the Kodumbalur Princess had
come to Anaimangalam and were waiting for the Prince at Nandi Mandapam.

“Aha! That girl who faints at the drop of one’s hat. Why should the Princess drag
her here?”

Chendan Amudhan replied:

“Your Highness. A new epidemic is spreading amongst the women of
Tamilnadu. They are saying that they are going to abandon the sacred religion of
Saivism and become Buddhist nuns.”

“Is it so? Who is saying that?”

“Kodumbalur Princess. And this Princess, seated before me.”

“Just two women, Amudha. No, that won’t be a big loss to Saivism. I know
several Buddhist nunneries in Sri Lanka. If necessary I’ll take these two women
there and admit them to a proper nunnery.”

Chendan Amudhan laughed.

Then he recounted the happenings from the time Arulmozhivarman and
Vandhiya Thevan reached the shore to the extent he knew. Ponniyin Selvan
listened to the narration with rapt attention comparing it with his memory of
what happened.

“That’s Nandi Mandapam over there.” Poonkuzhali spoke for the first time. The
Prince looked in the direction pointed out by her.

Chapter 44: The Nandi Grew Big

The boat was gliding through the canal. The banks at that place were covered by
tall, dense trees. There was a flight of steps and a small Mandapam in the
direction pointed out by Poonkuzhali. There were two statues of Nandi (The Bull
– the vehicle of Lord Shiva) at the point where the flight of steps ended in the
Mandapam. The statues were so exquisitely made that one could spend a whole
day admiring them. It was only because of those beautiful Nandi statues that the
Mandapam came to be called as Nandi Mandapam. Every year during the Spring
Festival Lord Kayaarohana Swami and Neelayadakshi Amman of
Thirunagaikkaronam would visit the Nandi Mandapam.

The God and the Goddess would be there for some time when people would
swarm to the place in thousands to have dharshan. There would be a grand
celebration at the end of which the people would participate in a moonlight
dinner before returning home. As the place was a little away from the main city
of Nagapattinam there would not be much crowd on ordinary days.

The boat came near the Mandapam. The Prince saw the two women waiting for
him. He could not see anything else. Nothing else could distract his attention
now.

By the time the boat came near the flight of steps Kunthavai had got down the
steps and was waiting in the last step. Vanathi, on the other hand, had halfhidden herself behind a pillar in the Mandapam.

The boat stopped. Chendan Amudhan standing in the boat and Kunthavai
standing outside it lent a helping hand to Prince to alight from the boat.

Chendhan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali rowed the boat in the reverse direction
and parked it in a hiding.

“Thambi, you have terribly gone down.” Even while Kunthavai spoke her voice
became choked and there were tears in her eyes.

“Akka, let’s discuss about my slimming down later. But what happened to you? I
don’t see the usual cheer in your face. Whenever you see me your face will
blossom like a lotus which has just seen the rising sun. But today the moon – I
mean your face – is covered by dark clouds. Why, Akka? Why are you crying? I
know, Akka. You are hurt by the recent developments. Otherwise you would not
have sent that kind of a message to me.”

“Yes, Thambi. I need to share so many things with you. It’s a kind of an
emergency. I need to know a lot from you. Oh great man, the one who refused
the golden throne of Lanka, please make this granite slab your throne for the
time being. We need to talk.”

Before sitting down Ponniyin Selvan bent down and touched his sister’s feet and
reverentially placed his hands on his eyes. Kunthavai placed her hand on his
head as if to bless him. And then kissed him on his forehead. There were more
tears in her eyes now.

When the two sat down Kunthavai spoke with a concern in her voice.

“I should not have dragged you here, brother. The Head of Choodamani

Monastery sent word that you are completely cured. Well, that’s not right. You
are not yet fully recovered. The viral fever has played havoc on your body. But I
could not remain without seeing you. After reaching Anaimangalam every
passing second dragged on like a year.”

“Akka, don’t feel bad for having brought me here. If only you had not sent the
boat to fetch me I’d have started for Pazhaiyaarai. Even while I was in the height
of my fever it was your letter that kept coming to my mind again and again.
Akka, I have to tell something about the messenger you chose for the job. I have
never seen a valiant, brave soul like him. I tested him in several ways. And he
came out in flying colours every time. Tell me Akka, where is he now?”

The clouds that had covered the moon of Kunthavai’s face parted a little. Her
rosy lips parted too to reveal her pearly white teeth set in a beautiful smile.

“Thambi, why should we bother about him now? We have many other things to
talk about.”

“Akka, why are you talking like that? Did he do something to incur your
displeasure?”

“No, not at all. Why should I be displeased? He promised to bring you here. He
has delivered on his promise.”

“But when I think what he did to bring me here... his valour, his courage, his
intelligence, his strategy... quite amazing... Where is he, Akka? When I was told
that you have come here to see me I thought he would have come with you. But
instead you have brought this lady who faints for the flimsiest of reasons!”

“Thambi, you do not know how courageous she has become. Our Chief
Minister’s elephant lifted her by its trunk and tossed her on my lap when I was
sitting on it. She does not know it. If only you had seen her during that time.... “

“Please, Akka, please stop flattering your friend. Tell me about my friend,
Vandhiya Thevan.”

“What do I have to say about him? He has completed his assignment and has
gone back to his employer, Adithya Karikalan.”

“He has gone back on his word. He told me that he will not go to Kanchi and
that he’ll stay with us in the Chozha country.”

“But how is that possible? What can he do in this country, Brother? We don’t
know about the fate of those who are living here. If you love him so much why
don’t you ask the Emperor to give back the country ruled by his ancestors to
him?”

“That’s a small fiefdom, Akka. What will that great warrior do with that small
territory?”

“He’ll do exactly what other chieftains are doing. You refused the Lankan
throne. Do you think he’d refuse his kingdom?”

The Prince smiled.

“Akka, I refused the Lankan throne in the presence of witnesses. Yet I have been
charged with the offence of sedition. Father has ordered that I be arrested and
brought here.”

“Thambi, you should have accepted the Lankan throne. Then the orders for your
arrest would not have been issued. You would have become a King in your own
right. Nobody could have arrested you.”

“Do you think I should have acted against our father’s wishes?”

“Ponniyin Selva! Our father would have been happy had you accepted the
Lankan throne. He would have divided the remaining Chozha Empire between
your brother and Madhuranthakan. That would have made him peaceful. There
is a plan to divide the Empire into two – the area north of River Coleroon as one
part and the area south of the river as another. Our father hopes you will help
him in this process. He sent word to you earlier. Since you did not come he
ordered your arrest only to make sure that you come. The Emperor knows very
well that you have refused the Lankan throne.”

“I’ll never let that happen. I’ll never let them divide the Empire. There is nothing
more shameful than that. I’d rather give the whole empire to our uncle
Madhuranthakan.”

“You and the Chief Minister think alike.”

“You are right, Akka. The Chief Minister concurs with me. The purpose of his

Lankan visit is to discuss this issue with me. Akka, can I tell you why I refused
the Lankan Crown?”

“Sure, Thambi. If you don’t tell me who else will?”

“There is nobody with whom I can share my mind. Before I went to Lanka I
thought it was a great country. Only after going there I realised it was so small
that riding on a horse or an elephant one can go from the Western shore to the
Eastern shore within a day.”

“Chozha Empire is no bigger, Thambi. Can’t you travel from border to border on
a horse in a single day?”

“Yes, even the Chozha Empire is very small. Even if somebody offers the
Chozha crown I’ll refuse that too. Those who divided this divine Tamilnadu into
Chozha, Chera and Pandya Kingdoms, they are criminals, Akka. That’s why
Tamilnadu doesn’t shine in glory though some of the country’s greatest warriors
were born here. Look what’s happening in the North. We have Chandra Gupta,
Asoka, Samudra Gupta, Vikramadithya and Harshavardhana. These great
emperors established a great empire and ruled over it. Did anybody try
something similar in Tamilnadu? Yes, there was this Emperor Mahendra Pallava
and his son Mamallan of the Pallava clan. But after them the Pallava clan waned.

Akka, if at all I decide to rule a country it won’t be something as small as our
Chozha Empire. My Empire will stretch from River Ganges in the North to
Srilanka in the South. Our Tiger Flag will fly in all the regions from Maldives to
Java. I’ll sit on the throne of such a magnificent Chozha Empire. Do you think I
am crazy, Akka?”

“Not at all, Arulmozhivarma! Not at all. I am happy that I have company in
building such dream castles in the air. If you are crazy then I am crazier still.
And, Thambi, I know that our father’s grandfather Emperor Paranthaka was as
crazy as we were. He too had a dream. A grand vision for a great empire. But it
did not happen during his life time. But I am going to see it happening in my life
time. I will not die till I see our Chozha Empire extending up to Maldives and
Java. At first I thought our brother Adithya Karikalan will make my dream come
true. But now I have lost hope. Adithyan is a great warrior. One of the most
valiant men of our times. But he can’t keep his mind under his control. He can’t
do great things. But I have not yet lost hopes on you. Something tells me that
you are going to make my dreams come true. I won’t lose hopes even if you fail
to accomplish these things. Your son may help me realise my dream. I will take
care of your son and bring him up like my own right from the time of his birth.
I’ll make him a great warrior. I’ll not let his mind be distracted by mean
pleasures. I’ll make him a lion amongst men who is going to do miracles to our
clan.”

“One thing is sure, Akka. You are far crazier than me. I don’t have any idea to
get married. And here you have started building dream castles about my son. If
any of your pet friends has any funny idea of marrying me advise her it won’t
happen at all. If she wants to wear the crown and sit on the throne through such
marriage tell her that it will never happen.”

As he spoke these words his eyes went to Vanathi hiding behind a pillar in the
Mandapam. When his eyes came back they saw the Nandi statues on the
Mandapam.

“Another piece of information, Akka. Srilanka may be a small country. But it
had been ruled by great Kings in the past. Great men with large hearts. They had
a great vision and accomplished great things. With mere bricks they constructed
Buddha Sthoopas which resembled mountains and touched the sky. They have
built Buddhist monasteries which had a thousand or two thousand rooms. They
raised Mandapams which were supported by thousands of pillars. To make us

realise the greatness of Buddha Bhagavan they made statues for him which were
as tall as that coconut tree over there. Now see the Nandi statue before us, Akka.
How small it is! Remember Nandi is the vehicle of the God whose beginning
and end could not be known. Does this small vehicle befit such a great Lord?
Lord Shiva resides in Kailas and his retinue consists of all ghouls and ghosts.
And Nandi Deva guards the gate of the Lord so that He is not disturbed by the
innumerable ghouls who live there. If Nandi is so small how can he block those
powerful creatures? Look there, Akka. This Nandi statue is growing before my
very eyes. It grows and grows. Becomes bigger and bigger. So big that it
ultimately touches the roof of this Mandapam. Now even the roof is gone. Nandi
Bhagavan touches the sky. Now the ghouls come to have dharshan of Lord
Shiva. They first bow reverentially to Nandi Bhagavan and seek his permission
before going in. If Nandi is that large then just imagine how huge should be the
temple, the Lord’s abode? Should the temple tower be high enough to be called
as the Southern Meru? Should not the corridor be of matching proportions? The
temples in our Chozha Empire are fit enough only for the short sage, Agasthya.
They are not fit for Lord Shiva. I don’t want the Kingdom, Akka. I’ll ask
whoever sits in the throne to appoint me as an Officer in charge of temple
renovation and rebuilding work.”

“Thambi, I think there is a competition between us in crazy thinking. Let that
wait. At present our Chozha Empire is surrounded by a great danger. The danger
is from external enemies, internal enemies and treacherous enemies posing as
friends. I have been having a nightmare for the past several days. I see a killer
sword, glowing as if it were a flash of lightning. The sword keeps appearing
before me again and again. It’s going to fall on somebody. I don’t know who is
going to be its victim. Will somebody in the Chozha Clan be a victim to that
knife or will that knife destroy the whole Empire by bifurcating it, I don’t know.
We should join hands and save our country from that danger.”

“You are right, Akka. From what Vandhiya Thevan told me I too share your
apprehension. I’m sure you know the main source of danger for the Chozha
clan.”

“Are you referring to the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur, Nandini?”

“Yes, Akka. I am sure you know who she is.”

“From what Vandhiya Thevan said I found that as well. That’s why I rushed to
see you here.”

Chapter 45: Vanathi Screams For Help!

"Akka, do you remember my drowning in the floods of River Cauvery when I
was barely five? Do you remember Mother Cauvery rescued me from water,
placed me on the boat and then vanished without a trace?”

“What a question, brother? How can I ever forget that? It is only because of that
you are known as Ponniyin Selvan.”

“Good. Do you know something? I saw Mother Cauvery, the one who saved me
from near death, at Srilanka. But Akka, why are you silent? Aren’t you
surprised?”

“I am not surprised, Thambi; but very curious. Can you please tell me everything
you know about her?”

“I can’t do it in a day, Akka. I’ll give the important details to you... She not only
saved me from Cauvery; but she saved my life several times in Srilanka. Well,
saving a life may not be a very great act in itself! You know many people save
others lives quite accidentally. The love she has for me... Oh My God... Even if I
were to give all the fourteen worlds to her it won’t be equal to her love, Akka.
You love me a lot, Akka. But even your love comes a poor second compared to
hers.”

“Thambi, you need not hesitate to make such a statement. My love is not
selfless. It’s based on a selfish interest. I’ll tell you the truth today. Thambi, for
me our country comes first. I love you for the only reason that you’ll help me

uphold the honour and glory of our great country. But if at any time I find out
that you’ll be a threat to our country’s glory I’ll start hating you. But that mute
lady’s love is different from mine. Her heart has been overflowing with love for
our father for the past twenty years and more. And she has transferred all that
love to you. You are right. Even all the fourteen worlds will not be equal to that
kind of selfless love.”

“How did you know, Akka?”

“What?”

“That she’s our stepmother?”

“I guessed from what our father said. From what Vandhiya Thevan said. Tell me
this Thambi. Does she treat you like her own son or her step-son?”

“I never thought like that, Akka. Why are you so keen on sullying her pure
affection, Akka?”

“Thambi, our mother is sitting on the throne which lawfully belongs to that mute
woman. And if she showers so much love on you even after knowing that...
well... her love is something very special.”

“She must have known that I am not her son. Well, can’t she see the age
difference? She can’t talk. She can’t express what’s there in her mind. I learnt as
much as I could by seeing the paintings created by her. Let’s forget the love she

has for me, Akka. But when I see the love she has for our father I invariably
melt, Akka. Our father should have looked like me when he was of my age.”

“No, Thambi. At your age our father was so very handsome that he could even
beat the Love God in his looks. You know our Chozha clan is known for its
valour and not for its good looks. Our grandfather Arinchaya Chozhan married
the most beautiful Kalyani born in the Vaithumbarayan clan. At the time of their
marriage Kalyani’s skin glowed in gold; her face was better than even the moon.
And she should have been the most beautiful woman in the world at that time.
You have seen our grandmother Kalyani and you know how beautiful she looks
even at this age. Our father inherited his mother’s good looks. And came to be
known as the ‘Beautiful Chozhan’ or ‘Sundara Chozhan’. But we have got our
mother’s looks. Those who are born in the Thirukkovilur Malayaman clan, our
mother’s clan, hate beauty. They think that beauty is the worst enemy of valour.”

“I don’t know whether beauty and valour are in any way related. But I know for
sure that there is no relationship between beauty and love. Otherwise...

“Otherwise why that girl Vanathi should see you secretly from behind that pillar
without even batting her eye-lids? Otherwise why Chendan Amudhan should
ecstatically look at Poonkuzhali without batting his eye-lids?”

The Prince smiled.

“Akka, why do you jump to something that is unrelated to the discussion? I was
speaking of my stepmother’s love for me. Let’s discuss that later. Akka, do you
think it is possible for one person to look exactly like another person?”

“Why not, brother? If they are twins it’s possible. It’s possible for a daughter to
exactly resemble her mother when her mother was of the same age. Apart from
this it is quite possible for two totally unconnected persons to perfectly resemble
each other.”

“Akka, Vandhiya Thevan told me that our stepmother looks exactly like the
Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. Can that be true? I’ve seen Nandini when she was a
girl. I’ve not seen her since she became the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. What do
you think, Akka?”

“Yes, I’ve seen the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. But I have not seen our step
mother. But what Vandhiya Thevan said must be true. I happened to know that
from what our father said.”

“Oh My God! Our father himself talked to you about that? What did he say?
When?”

“A few days back Vanathi and I had been to Thanjavur. Our father spoke about
what happened during his young days. He told me how he was marooned in a
small island in Sri Lanka and how a mute girl showered her love on him. He also
told me about how Emperor Paranthaka’s men found him in that island and
brought him home. On the day our father was made the Crown Prince he saw
that woman amongst the people who thronged at the Palace gates. But the
woman vanished immediately. He then sent the Chief Minister to fetch that girl.
But the Minister came back to report that the lady killed herself by jumping from
the light house. It was then I knew that this incident has been haunting our father
for the past twenty four years. He still thinks that she is dead. And that he was in
a way responsible for her death. That guilt feeling is killing him. Let our dreams
about a mighty Chozha Empire wait for some time. We now owe a duty to our
father. You should somehow bring that good lady to Thanjavur. We should prove
to our father that she is very much alive. Otherwise our father will never find
peace in this life. Nor even in his future lives.”

“Akka, very recently I went very close to the gates of death and came back to
life. You know what was in my mind at that time? There was a deep longing that
I was dying without taking our stepmother to our father. Every time I think of
that angel I melt into tears, Akka. If only she had her voice she could have
shared her grief with somebody. If she had her hearing she could at least have
heard the words of consolation coming from her friends. Just think of a person
without her speech and hearing abilities. She has to simply bury her love, her
curiousity, her sorrow, her grief, her anger, her yearning, her desire everything in
the deepest recesses of her mind. And that too think of somebody like our
stepmother whose desires and love have been cruelly frustrated by the turn of
events. There is no wonder she is roaming like a mad woman in the forests of
Srilanka. My heart can’t hold these thoughts and is threatening to burst in grief,
Akka. I want to bring her to our father. But do you think our father will like it,
Akka?”

“Whether our father likes it or not, it’s our duty, Thambi. Our father screams in
the night thinking that the dead woman is coming as a ghost to haunt him. I think
that this hampers his recovery.”

“How did you know that, Akka? Father told that too?”

“Yes. And Vanathi also told that to me.”

“Vanathi told that? Where does she come into the picture, Akka? Did you tell
everything to her?”

“No. No. Not at all. Let me ask her to narrate what she saw in Thanjavur Palace
one night. But you are very bad, Thambi. You are discourteous. You have thrown

the traditionally gentle manners of the Chozha Royal family to winds. You have
not yet spoken a single word to the Kodumbalur Princess. You have not even
asked her, ‘How are you?’ Is this the courtesy shown by a great warrior like you
to the only daughter of the Junior Velar of Kodumbalur, one of the greatest
warriors our country ever had?”

“Akka, when you are there to look after her why should I worry about her wellbeing? Why should I even enquire about her welfare, Akka?”

“Beautiful. Will you keep your mouth shut for some time? Vanathi..... Come
here. The Prince wants to see you close.”

Vanathi came near them. She saw the Prince, but pretended that she did not
notice his presence there. She talked to Kunthavai in her characteristic silky
voice:

“Akka, why are you letting your imagination run riot? Your brother does not
want to see me. All his attention is on the boat that is there in the canal. Looks
like he has to rush back to the boat.”

Arulmozhivarman was laughing.

“Akka, your friend can talk! That’s great. I thought she is also mute along with
the other mute members of our family.”

Vanathi spoke without looking at him.

“Akka, I can’t speak if I see him. Those times I have a fear that I have gone
dumb.”

“That’s in a way good. I know a guy who lives in Kodikkarai. He’s
Poonkuzhali’s elder brother. When he talks with other people he stutters and
stammers. But the moment he sees his wife he becomes absolutely dumb. So
people in his household consider him a dumb person for all practical purposes.”

Kunthavai intervened in the conversation for the first time.

“This Kodumbalur girl is no different. In the early days it was very difficult to
keep her silent. Once she starts to talk she’d never stop. But ever since you left
for Lanka the first time she has cut down on her talking. She often sits alone and
thinks of something. Vanathi, please tell the Prince about what happened in the
Thanjavur Palace.”

“Let the Kodumbalur Princess sit down and talk, Akka. If her Uncle Bhoothi
Vikrama Kesari sees her standing for such a long time he’ll melt. The
Commander of the Southern Forces, her uncle, enquires about this girl’s wellbeing every time he sees me. But Akka, you don’t send any news about her. So
many times I would not know what to tell him.”

“I sent detailed news about Vanathi through Vandhiya Thevan. Didn’t he tell
anything?”

“Akka, he should have conveyed. But that would not have gone into the Prince’s

ears. The Prince has so many things to think about.” – There was sarcasm in
Vanathi’s voice.

“That’s also true, Akka. After I saw your letter I could hardly think of anything
else. And after this damned fever even my hearing has weakened. So please ask
your friend to speak a little louder.”

Vanathi started the narration. She told about her being alone in the Palace terrace
while Kunthavai had gone to the Durga Temple. She described the Emperor’s
call for help. She also told about how she rushed to the place and looked into the
Emperor’s chambers. She vividly described what she saw there.

Whenever Vanathi looked up to see the Prince’s face she forgot everything and
became silent. Kunthavai had to prod her to talk every time.

The Prince was listening to Vanathi with rapt attention. At the end he told his
sister:

“Akka, your dear friend has left out an important event. After seeing all that she
should have fainted. Am I right?”

Kunthavai laughed. Vanathi became too shy and was looking down.

Kunthavai saw her friend with all the love in the world.

“Vanathi, why don’t you go for a long walk along the canal bank? Or else go to
the place where our group is staying. Arulmozhivarman will be here for a few
days. There will be a time to meet him again.”

“Sure, Akka. I’d go for a walk.”

Vanathi almost danced her way out of the place. How did she become so happy,
nobody knew.

Arulmozhivarman was seeing the receding figure of Vanathi with his eyes wide
open and with a smile etched on his beautiful face.

When Vanathi was out of sight he looked at his sister.

“Akka, I know the reason behind our father’s wailing. But what do you think of
the scene? What could be the nature of the form that appeared before our father?
Was it his hallucination? Assuming that it is nothing but hallucination how did
your friend experience exactly the same kind of hallucination?”

“It was not hallucination or an illusion, Brother. What Vanathi saw was real. A
mid-night drama was enacted before our father. The main role in the drama was
played by the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur, Nandini. I could guess that even at that
time. My views were confirmed by what you and Vandhiya Thevan said about
the mute woman of Srilanka.”

“What’s the motive, Akka? Why should the Pazhuvur Queen do that?”

“Nandini has doubts about her birth and her parents. Once the Emperor fainted
after seeing her. She knows that and avoids appearing before the Emperor.
Perhaps she is enacting this drama to discover the truth about her parents.”

“Do you think that she doesn’t know the truth?”

“I don’t know. Even the Creator cannot fathom what’s in her mind. When I see
what Pazhuvettaraiyar is going through as her husband I pity him. Thambi,
didn’t we talk about beauty a little while ago? Nandini is the most beautiful
woman on earth. We are not even fit to be a dust particle attached to her feet. All
the men who see her fall for her immediately. Pazhuvettaraiyar,
Madhuranthakan, Thirumalaiyappan, Kandhanmaran and the last in the list is
Parthibendran. The Chief Minister is afraid of her beauty and never goes before
her. Adithya Karikalan does not come to Thanjavur for the same reason. Thambi,
there is only one person who is not afraid of her beauty; only one who could not
be defeated by her good looks, only one who came back unscathed after visiting
her.”

“You mean Vandhiya Thevan?”

“Yes. That’s why I’ve sent him to Kanchi with a message to Adithya Karikalan.”

“Why?”

“Nandini has sent a message to our brother asking him to come to Kadambur
Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace. I have sent Vandhiya Thevan to our brother with a

message to somehow prevent that meeting – the meeting between Karikalan and
Nandini. Even if they meet I’ve asked him to make sure nothing untoward
happens. Karikalan does not know that Nandini is our elder sister. I don’t know
whether Nandini knows her true identity.”

“Akka, is she really our sister? Is it true?”

“There’s no doubt about it, Thambi. Ever since I came to know of it I changed
my mind. When we were children I hated Nandini. I insulted her. I was jealous
of her beauty. I saw to it that you or Karikalan never talked to her. Even after she
left for the Pandya Kingdom my jealousy and hatred did not go away. And after
she came back as the wife of the old man of Pazhuvur I have insulted her several
times. I am planning for some kind of atonement for all my sins.”

“What atonement, Akka?”

“When I meet her next I am going to fall at her feet and seek her forgiveness for
what I did to her. And I’ll gladly accept whatever punishment she gives me.”

“No, Akka. You can’t do that. I won’t let you do that. You are blameless. You
don’t have to seek anybody’s forgiveness. There is no one in all the fourteen
worlds who is good enough to award a punishment to you. No, Akka. You were
never jealous of her. She was jealous of you. You did not hate her. She hated
you.”

“Thambi, only a little while ago you said that your heart bleeds for our
stepmother who is roaming the forests of an alien nation like a beggar. Nandini
should have lived in our palace with all the attendant Royal luxuries. And when I

see the kind of suffering Nandini has to go through in her life, well, my heart
bleeds for her. Because of some mistake somebody did sometime in the past my
sister Nandini had to marry an old man.”

“Can you guess how these things happened? Why should our father think that
our stepmother is dead? Why should Nandini be brought up in some stranger’s
place like an orphan? How did she reach her present condition?”

“I’ve been thinking of all those things day and night. But still I could not lay my
hands on the exact reason. There are only two persons alive in the whole world
who know all the secrets. Our grandmother Sembian Madevi knows something.
Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar knows everything. But I don’t think
they’ll share the secrets with us. The Minister’s disciple Azhwarkkadian must
know something. He is worse than his master. He won’t open his mouth at any
cost. Thambi, there is no urgency now to dig those dark secrets. Our problem
now is to prevent the destruction, defiling and defamation of the Chozha clan at
the hands of Nandini. I heard Vandhiya Thevan say, ‘Nandini holds a sword
which shines like a flash of lightning. There’s the symbol of fish on that sword.
She is worshipping the sword.’ I have been restless ever since I heard that news.
I am worried that Nandini might harm the Chozha clan without even knowing
that she is a part of it.”

“Why don’t we tell everything to Nandini?”

“I don’t think that will make any difference. That will only make her more
furious. I think we have to just do our duty.”

“You are right in sending Vandhiya Thevan for the purpose. But should you not
inform our father? Poor man, why should he have this mental agony over and
above his physical agony? Can we leave for Thanjavur now?”

“No Thambi, we should not. Never. I am leaving for Thanjavur in two days. But
you will have to stay in Choodamani Monastery for some more time.”

“Why are you saying that, Akka? Do you want me to live like a fugitive
violating the orders of our father, the Emperor?”

“Yes. Your coming to Thanjavur now will create a chaos. People are furious over
Madhuranthakan and the Pazhuvettaraiyar brothers. People are angry even with
their Emperor because he ordered your arrest. If the people see you now they’ll
become way too emotional. Then we don’t know what will happen. They will
raise their voice to demand that you should be made the king immediately. The
Palace and the Thanjavur Fort will be under siege. Our father who is already hurt
will be hurt even more. I summoned you because I thought our Kingdom is in
danger and I wanted you to save it. And now for the very same reason I think it’s
better if you go back to Lanka again.”

“Impossible, Akka, Impossible! I won’t go back before seeing our father. If you
think that I should come to Thanjavur secretly I will do it. But I have to see the
Emperor. I have to tell him about the Cauvery Amman who saved me from the
floods.”

“I will tell him at the right time. Do you have to come for that?”

“I have seen that lady in person. The story will be credible if I directly speak to
our father. I will be peaceful as well for I’d have done my duty to my father... I’ll
also get his permission to bring our stepmother back to our country.”

“Arulmozhivarma! I am not going to stand in your way. But you stay in this
Choodamani Monastery for one more week. I’ll leave for Thanjavur early. I’ll
let father know that you have come and then send message to you. Thambi, I
came here not just to see you. I have come to beg a boon from you. And if you
give that boon to me I won’t disturb you hereafter. Yes, men have to take risks.
You should become famous as one who is not averse to risks, the one who is
capable of greatest acts of valour. That’s my wish, Thambi. But before
subjecting yourself to further risks you should please grant a boon to me.”

“Why do you need such a long prelude Akka? Have I ever gone against your
word?”

“No, you haven’t. That gives me the confidence to seek this boon. Adithya
Karikalan has not yet married. I don’t think he’d marry. Sundara Chozhan’s clan
should flourish only through you. And you should fulfil my wishes in this
regard.”

“If I agree to fulfil your wishes will you let me marry a girl I like?”

“Why are you asking that question, Thambi? For the past twenty years our likes
have never been different. Why do you ask my permission for this?”

“Akka, there is a reason. The girl I marry should help me realise my dream,
right?”

“Right. But do you want to realise your dream through a girl?”

“AIYOO! AIYOO! AKKA! AKKA!”

They heard a pathetic call for help. It was from Vanathi.

Chapter 46: Vanathi Laughed!

Prince Arulmozhivarman and Kunthavai were in conversation. Vanathi was
listening to every word. She was standing behind a pillar.

At the same time there was another conversation – between Poonkuzhali and
Chendhan Amudhan.

“Amudha, I am going to ask you something. Will you give me an honest
answer?”

“Nothing but truth will pass through my mouth, Poonkuzhali. That’s the reason I
didn’t see anybody during the last four days. I haven’t talked to anyone. For if I
see anybody and I am asked something I can’t hide the truth from them.”

“Truth never passes through the mouths of some men. The best example is the
person who carried a message to the Prince in Srilanka – Vandhiya Thevan.”

“But he is a good man. He never lies to cheat others.”

“He told me something about you. I want to know whether it is true or false.”

“There is no reason for him to lie about me. Anyway tell me what he said about

me.”

“He told me that you praised me a lot.”

“That’s absolutely true.”

“He told me that you love me and want to marry me.”

“Did he really tell that?”

“Yes, Amudha, I swear.”

“Then I’ll have to thank him.”

“What for?”

“I would not have spoken my mind to you. You know I am not that bold. And he
spoke for me. He was my messenger in this game of love. I’ll have to thank him
for that.”

“What do you mean? Is that true?”

“Yes, it is, Poonkuzhali. There’s no doubt about it.”

“Why did you fall in love with me, Amudha?”

“Does love have to have a reason, dear?”

“Why don’t you think over it? There has to be some reason for your love.”

“Nobody in this world has ever found out how does love happen or what makes
it happen, Poonkuzhali.”

“Do not people get attracted by beauty and fall in love?”

“Yes they do. Beauty fans the desire in people. It fans the lust in them. But I
can’t accept that as true love. And such feelings do not last long.

"You mentioned Vandhiya Thevan a little while ago. He became friends with me
the moment he saw me. I am now ready to give my life for him. Tell me did he
become friends with me because of my good looks?”

“But your friend did have a lot of words to describe my beauty, right?”

“Yes, he did. But he did not fall in love with you or lust for you. He described

the Pazhuvur Queen’s beauty a hundred times more. But he did not fall in love
with her.”

“I know the reason.”

“What’s it?”

“The warrior has lost his heart to Princess Kunthavai.”

“This shows that there is no connection between beauty and love.”

“How do you say that? Do you think I am more beautiful than the Princess?”

“No doubt about it. You are several times more beautiful than the Princess as
well as the Kodumbalur Princess hiding behind the pillar.

"Even the beauty of Nandini who is praised as Mohini in another form is no way
equal to yours, Poonkuzhali. Such a divine beauty in you has become my worst
enemy. It’s because of that I can’t express my love which flows like a river in
spate breaching all banks and boundaries.

"I even have a fear that the beauty loved by the angels in heaven and the greatest
of emperors in earth is going to be exclusively mine one day.”

Poonkuzhali remained silent for a while. Her words were now very soft.

“Amudha, suppose I tell you that I don’t love you, what will you do?”

“I will be patient. I will wait for your mind to change.”

“How will it change?”

“Human mind is quite strange. We do not know the intricacies of our own minds.
Our minds might be in hallucination due to external distractions. When the
distractions leave us we’ll come to know what’s in our mind.”

“Ok, you are waiting. If my mind does not change... “

“I’ll try to remove the love I have for you... “

“Is it possible?”

“Possible if I make an attempt. Quite possible if I divert my attention to God.
Our ancestors controlled their mind and their desires only be remaining devoted
to God.”

“Amudha, I don’t think your love for me is genuine.”

“How do you say that? What’s the hallmark of genuine love?”

“If only your love is real when I refuse it you will want to kill me. And if I were
to love somebody else in your place you’ll kill him too. You will be angry.
You’ll be furious.”

“Poonkuzhali, mine is divine love which belongs to the Saatvic variety. The love
you are talking about is that of a demon. It is the Devil’s love.”

"I don’t know either the divine or the devil. I know only the human nature. Love
should bring us happiness. If it’s going to bring us grief what’s the big deal?
Why should we have it at all? If we love somebody and that somebody does not
reciprocate our love, if that somebody betrays us, why should we remain silent?
Is it not human nature to take revenge under such circumstances…?”

“No, Poonkuzhali taking revenge is not human nature. It’s a demon’s nature. If
we truly love somebody whatever makes him or her happy should make us
happy too. I do concede that rejection will be a little painful initially. If only we
learn to bear it and return good for bad then the happiness we gain will be ten
times more.”

“Now, that surely is not human nature. And human beings are not capable of
returning love for hatred. Do you know about the Doctor’s son who came with
Vandhiya Thevan? He professed his love for me. When he knew his love was
defeated he thought that it was all because of Vandhiya Thevan and he betrayed
his companion Vandhiya Thevan to Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men. He could have
killed me too.”

“Then he does not belong to the human race. He must belong to a race of
heartless demons.”

"See there... do you recognise her? Yes, she is the Kodumbalur Princess. She has
lost her heart to Ponniyin Selvan. If the Prince does not accept their love what
will she do? She’ll try to poison him. If she knows some other girl has stolen his
heart then she’d kill that girl too.”

“I’d never subscribe to those views, Poonkuzhali. Vanathi is the very definition
of softness and will never do something like that.”

“Possible. But if I were in her place I will.”

“I’ll pray to God to forgive you and save you from that heinous sin.”

“God forgiving me? My foot! I should forgive God.”

“God will forgive your blasphemy as well.”

“Amudha, you are an angel. You’ve inherited the traits of my elder aunt.”

“What’s that? You’ve never talked about her. Why should you drag her into our
conversation now?”

“It’s believed in our family circles that my elder aunt is dead.”

“Who, you mean the lady who is elder to your mother and my father?”

“Yes. You know she is very much alive.”

“I too heard something like that.”

“She is roaming the Lankan Island like a mad woman.”

“It’s a family curse. What can we do, Poonkuzhali?”

“It’s not just the family curse. It’s because of the cruel betrayal of a person
belonging to the Chozha clan.”

“WHAT? WHAT? COME AGAIN.”

“In her young days she lived in an island near Srilanka. A Chozha prince
pretended to love her. She believed him. Later when he became the Crown
Prince he ditched her.”

“How did you know all these things, Poonkuzhali?”

“From my aunt’s sign language. Listen to me. A few days ago some people from
the Pandya Kingdom came here. They sought my help to take revenge on the
Royal clan that had cheated my aunt and let her down.

"I knew my aunt’s story and my blood was boiling at that time. I had almost
decided to join the Pandya group. Only then did I come to know of my aunt’s
heart.

"She had not only forgiven the person who so cruelly betrayed her love; but
saved the child that was born of him through another woman. That too not once,
but several times. Then I abandoned the idea of joining hands with the Pandya
group. As you said my aunt’s love is really divine. But mark my words, I won’t
be like her.”

“Then?”

“If any Prince tries to deceive me I’ll take revenge. I’ll kill him. I’ll also kill the
woman who steals him from me. Then I’ll stab myself and die.”

“Oh My God! How terrible! What happened to you?”

“Amudha, you would have never suspected that my heart has been boiling for
the past two years. That’s why you are preaching non-violence to me.”

“Why should your heart boil when your aunt’s is peaceful?”

“That’s her love and her life. This is purely mine.”

“Is it yours? Is that true? Poonkuzhali, think before you talk.”

“Yes, Amudha. Draw a little blood from me and Vanathi. Then compare the
blood samples. Will there be any difference between them?”

“How can there be a difference?”

“Is she any way better than me? In intelligence, beauty or skills?”

“Not at all. You grew up with the waves in the ocean. She grew up in a palace.
You can kill wild beasts with your bare hands. You can steer your boat through a
turbulent storm in the sea.

"You can rescue those who are caught in the sea. But Vanathi will be frightened
of the waves. She will scream in fear even if she sees a domestic cat. And if she
hears some bad news she’ll faint.”

“Then why does the Princess consider me as dirt while she showers all her love
and attention on that timid girl?”

“Vanathi, that’s unfair. Vanathi is a long time friend of the Princess. She knows
you only now. Didn’t she thank you profusely for saving the Prince from the sea
and bringing him safely to the shore?”

“Who wants the gratitude of that Palace Lady? Let her keep it with herself.
Amudha, if we have to take the Prince back to the Monastery you row the boat
alone. If I come I might wantonly sink the boat.”

“You’ll never do anything like that, dear. What crime did the Prince do to merit
such a cruel punishment at your hands?”

“Amudha, I am crazy. My mind is not in my control. If I start to think of how the
Prince’s father cheated my aunt I might sink the boat. It will be safe for the
Prince if you row the boat.”

“Ok, I’ll take the Prince to the Monastery. But what are you going to do till I
come back?”

“Me? I’ll follow Vanathi wherever she goes and throw a stone on her head.”

Poonkuzhali bent down and picked up a large pebble on the canal bank. Almost
at the same time a huge bull was coming out of the dense coconut grove near the
bank.

Poonkuzhali transferred all her anger to the majestic bull. She threw the stone on
the beast.

The pebble did not miss its mark. Well it hit the bull’s eye. No, it was the bull’s
head. The body of the beast shivered for a second. The beast then looked at the
direction from which the stone came.

“Oh My God! Poonkuzhali! What have you done! You have thrown the stone on
an angry bull.”

“So what?”

“Poor soul! He does not even know how to protect himself!”

“There was a mute girl in my clan. And somebody hurt her. How the hell can I
punish the offenders! Because the lady could not defend herself a Prince cheated
her and destroyed her life.”

"Why do you blame this poor beast for the injustice meted out to your aunt by
somebody else?”

“Don’t think that this bull is helpless. The bull has sharp horns. It can attack its
aggressors. But what can a poor woman who is deaf and dumb, one who does
not know the evil ways of the world do? If some bloody Prince tries to do the
same thing to me I won’t leave him alone.”

“You won’t leave him! You will throw a stone on a bull. That too while sitting
comfortably on a boat in a canal. The bull can never come near you.”

“If the bull can’t hit me let it hit somebody else. Who the hell cares?”

“You are angry with somebody. And you are showing that anger on this poor
animal. It’s not right.”

Of course the angry bull could not understand a word of their conversation. But
it did precisely as Poonkuzhali predicted. It could not get into water and show its
fury to Poonkuzhali who was in the boat.

It turned around and started running fast. Vanathi was walking alone towards the
palanquin which was on the other side of the coconut grove.

Her mind was dancing in joy. When she saw the bull jumping and running
towards her at first her happiness increased. But when she saw the bull raging
towards her with its head bent, with its horns ready to attack and with its tail up
in the air she was frightened.

She had no other alternative than to run back towards the canal bank. She
reached the bank but could not move further. She first thought of returning to the
Nandi Mandapam by running along the canal bank. The bull had by that time
come very close to her. She had no other way than to move backwards and
falling into the canal.

It was only at that time she screamed for help.

“AIYOO! AIYOO! AKKA! AKKA!”

Vanathi’s pathetic call for help fell on the ears of Kunthavai and Ponniyin
Selvan. They were shocked and looked in the direction of her voice. Vanathi was
standing a little away from the Nandi Mandapam on the tall bank of the canal.
Her back was towards the canal. It appeared as if she was facing something
frightening.

The next second they knew what frightened the life out of her.

“MMMMMMMAAAAAAA”

The bull shouted as it came close to Vanathi.

If only Vanathi took one more step backward she would fall in the canal. And
there was no other way. The Prince fully understood her plight. He sprang into
the canal from the steps of Nandi Mandapam.

He ran like a flash of lighting wading water. Vanathi’s falling down from the
bank was perfectly synchronized with the Prince reaching there with
outstretched hands. But for the Prince Vanathi would have fallen headlong into
the canal. He received a falling Vanathi in his hands.

For a second Kunthavai’s heart stopped. The very next second when she saw
Arulmozhivarman holding Vanathi in his hands she was immersed in a sea of
happiness. Vanathi was like a slender creeper in the mighty arms of the Prince.

Still holding her in his hands the Prince came near Kunthavai.

“Akka, here’s your friend. I am surprised how this girl was born in the warrior
clan of Kodumbalur.”

“Thambi, what have you done? How can you touch a virgin, let alone hold her in
your hands! Oh My God!”

“Oh My God! Is that a crime, Akka? Do you want her to fall headlong in water
and lose her life? Thank God! She does not know that I am holding her. She
fainted even while falling down. Come, take her from me.”

Vanathi opened her eyes and laughed out aloud. She jumped from the arms of
the Prince.

“Naughty girl! You are fully conscious!” – teased Kunthavai.

“AKKA! Ask her why she pretended to be unconscious.” – Ponniyin Selvan.

“I didn’t pretend, Akka. When he touched me I felt very shy. And just closed my
eyes. That’s all.”

“How the hell do I know? I know your friend is quite addicted to the habit of
falling unconscious.”

“I promise, Akka, I won’t faint in future. And even if I did I won’t do it in his
presence. But let him not forget the help he received from me today.”

“What? Help? This girl helped me! Beautiful. I thought it was the other way
round.”

Kunthavai too was perplexed.

“Hey what are you saying? Did you mean to say that you won’t forget my
brother’s help in saving you?”

“Not at all, Akka. It was I who helped your brother. In a big way. He has to be
grateful to me forever.”

“Does she want me to thank her because I saved her from falling into the canal?
Has your friend lost her mind, Akka?”

“My mind is perfectly all right, Akka. Only this man’s mind is in a state of
confusion. Akka, once when he was a kid he fell into River Cauvery. A woman
rescued him. And recently he fell into the sea. There again a boat-girl came to
rescue him.

It has become a habit for him to get into danger and then be rescued by some
woman or the other. I helped him to get rid of that bad name.

I gave him the fame of a man who boldly rescued a woman from a canal. I’ve
made him look chivalrous and courageous. Should he not be grateful to me?”

Vanathi laughed. Kunthavai too joined in her laugh. Ponniyin Selvan first tried to
control his laugh; but he failed miserably and burst out laughing. The sound of
their laughing crossed the Nandi Mandapam and echoed against the skies.

Even those in the boat heard them laughing.

“Amudha, do you hear those three crazy people laughing?” – Poonkuzhali burst
out laughing with these words. Amudhan too started laughing along with her.

The birds living in the coconut grove too laughed in their own way making
peculiar sounds -”kilu kilu kilu kilu.”

The bull which was majestically standing on the canal bank till now grunted and
left the place with its own style of laughing.

The waves in the ocean laughed majestically. The cool breeze coming from the
sea too joined the laugh with is soft voice.

