Ponniyin Selvan Part 5

The Supreme Sacrifice

Author:

Kalki

Rendered In English By:

Varalotti Rengasamy
Chapter 1: Three Voices

Ponniyin Selvan was patiently waiting for a chance to get out of the Choodamani
Buddhist Monastery at Nagapattinam. He wanted to go to Thanjavur to see his
parents. He had been charged with a grave offence – that of usurping the Lankan
Throne from his own father, Emperor Sundara Chozhan. Arulmozhivarman was
quite desperate to prove his innocence.

The Prince however controlled himself and patiently waited for orders from his
elder sister Kunthavai. In any case he did not want to leave the peaceful confines
of the famed monastery without clear instructions from his sister. Inside the
monastery time hung heavily on him. He took part in the daily rituals of the
monastery and yet he did not have anything to do for most part of the day.

He also spent time looking at the beautiful paintings on the walls of the
monastery. He loved talking to the Chief Monk. There was a reason. The Chief
Monk had travelled far and wide. He had travelled to many countries that lay
beyond the Eastern Seas. The Monk had been to China and Java Islands. And he
always had many interesting stories to share about those exotic countries and
their people.

Many island-nations south of China at that time were under the Sri Vijayam
Empire. Countries like Cambodia, Arumanam, Manakkavaram,
Thalaithakkolam, Mappalam, Mayirudangam, Lanka Soham, Thamaralingam,
and Lemuria were either under the direct rule of Sri Vijayam Empire or were
friendly nations to the Empire. Kadaram was a centrally located city in the
region. Kadaram was highly prosperous and was regarded as a centre of
civilisation in those days.

Whenever the Chief Monk had free time Ponniyin Selvan requested him to talk
about life in those countries. The Monk was quite happy to do so. He described
the abundance of natural resources and the flourishing trade in those countries.
Paddy and sugarcane grew in plenty. Gold, pearls and other precious gems were
traded in large quantities. The countries competed with the magnificence and
prosperity of the Chozha Empire in all respects.

The Chief Monk told the Prince about the connection Tamilnadu had with these
countries from very old times. Sculptors from Pallava Kingdom had travelled to
those countries to build mighty stone temples. The fine arts of Tamilnadu,
painting, music and classical dancing flourished in those countries. The great
epics of India, Ramayana and Mahabharatha, the gods worshipped by the people
of Tamilnadu, Lord Ganesh, Lord Subramanya, Lord Shiva, Goddess Parvathi
and Lord Vishnu along with Buddha Dharma lived in the collective
consciousness of the people in those countries. The people living there could not
differentiate between gods and religions, and worshipped Buddha as well as
Vishnu, and followed the rules of Buddhism as well as Hinduism.

The patron saint for Tamil Language Sage Agasthya was highly regarded by
those people and several temples had been built for him.

Prince Arulmozhivarman absorbed these titbits of information and stored them
in the depths of his mind. He enquired about the land and sea routes to those
countries. He also asked about the risks involved in travelling.

“Oh Holy One, will you be going to those countries again?”

“It all depends on the will of Lord Buddha. Why do you ask this question,
Prince?”

“If you are going again, I want to accompany you, Oh Holy One!”

“Prince, I am a monk who has renounced the world. You are our Emperor’s son.
How can we travel together? Even to have you here with us is a huge
responsibility. I am really afraid, Prince. How are we going to take care of you?
How are we going to save you from dangers while you are with us? I am so
worried about your safety that I can barely sleep.”

“I am terribly sorry, Holy One! I want to relieve you of your burden right now. I
am planning to leave this place this very moment......”

“Oh I too am terribly sorry, Prince! I was thinking of something else and just
blurted out. I never meant it. Yes, I do concede that keeping you in the
monastery is a very high security risk. But in a way it’s a great privilege too.
Your father, The Emperor, and your elder sister Princess Kunthavai have done a
lot for us. What we are doing now is not equal to a millionth of what your people
have done for us. And Prince, whatever you have personally done for our
religion is invaluable. How can we forget your work in renovating the ruins of
monasteries and pillars at Anuradhapura in Srilanka? It was only in recognition
of your services that the Buddhists in Lanka offered the Lankan Crown to you
literally on a platter. Why did you refuse it, Prince? If only you had ascended the
Lankan Throne, you could have gone to the Eastern Countries accompanied by
men and materials in hundreds of ships. Why do you want to go along with a
poor Buddhist monk like me when you could have travelled as a King with your
own Royal retinue?”

"Gurudeva, have you read the book Mahavamsa which talks of the history of the
Royal family that ruled over Srilanka?”

“What a question, Prince! How could I have become the Chief Monk of this
Choodamani Monastery without reading Mahavamsa? That is almost a
prescribed text for Buddhist monks.”

“I am sorry, Holy One. That was a dumb question. I could have as well asked
you ‘Are you literate?’ I am sure you know the shocking crimes committed by
the members of the Royal household in Lanka. The son imprisoned his own
father. The father killed his first born. The mother poisoned her own son to
death. The son burnt the mother on the stake. If that described the relationship
between parents and their children one can’t even dream of the hatred that
existed between uncles and nephews, and between brothers and cousins. No
other book I have known, so graphically describes the atrocities committed by
those who were greedy for power and wealth like Mahavamsa.”

“You are right. But the book also described in an equally graphical manner the
punishment meted out to the wrong doers. And the book cites these examples
only to urge the people to walk on the path of righteousness. That is the central
message of the book and we should never forget that, Prince. That makes the
book holy. In fact Mahavamsa is one of the most powerful books ever written on
the importance of being righteous.”

The Chief Monk was quite anxious to defend his holy text.

“I am not blaming the book, Holy One. I wanted to say how greed corrupts men
and a thirst for power makes them worse than demons. The Lankan throne is
stained by the sins of the ruling dynasty. Tell me, Holy One, was I not right in
refusing the blood-stained Crown?”

“The intelligence of the federation of Lankan Buddhists is beyond words. They
in fact wanted to change the ruling dynasty. They wanted to start a new era, a

new clan beginning with you, Prince. You were wrong in refusing the Crown.
You had the chance of adorning the Lankan throne and spreading the message of
Lord Buddha throughout the world like Emperor Asoka. You ruined it.”

“Holy One! Where is Emperor Asoka who brought the entire Indian subcontinent under his rule and where am I, a lad who has sought protection from
you and who for the time being is a fugitive hiding in your monastery? To tell
you the truth I am not even fit to be your disciple. How can I hope to spread or
defend Buddhism?”

“Please don’t talk like that, Prince. You don’t know your real powers. If only you
embraced Buddhism you will be as great and as famous as Emperor Asoka.”

“Please forgive me, Holy One. Lord Ganesh, Lord Muruga, Goddess Parvathi,
Lord Shiva, Nandi, Bringi and Chandikeswara are firmly seated in the throne of
my heart. If I want to make space for Buddhism I have to remove those Gods.
Please forgive me, Master. When I said I will travel with you to those countries I
didn’t mean that I’ll convert to Buddhism. I want to go by sea and visit distant
countries. That has been my long-time dream. That was the reason I wanted to
travel with you. But when I think about it again....”

“Sorry, Prince. I misunderstood your words. But you can’t deny the connection
you have with Buddhism. In one of his previous births Lord Buddha was born as
Emperor Sibi. He gave his flesh to save the life of a dove. Emperor Sibi belongs
to your Chozha clan. That is the reason the members of your clan are sometimes
called Sembians, a word derived from Emperor Sibi’s name. I don’t want you to
forget that, Prince.”

"I have not forgotten that, Holy One. How can I? The blood that is coursing
through my veins constantly reminds me of my lineage. Emperor Sibi, who gave

his flesh to save a dove and Manuneethi Chozhan who did not hesitate to put his
son to death to meet the ends of justice are part of my flesh and blood, Master.
They are part of my consciousness and are dinning into my ears: Help others.
Sacrifice your comforts for the sake of others. Give up your life for the sake of
people.

“On the other side my great forebears, Karikal Valavan, Vijayaalaya Chozhan
and Emperor Paranthaka who too are in my blood, roar: Take the sword. Gather
an army. Go on all the four directions. Cross the seas. Expand the Chozha
Empire and make the whole world exclaim that there is no other Empire in the
annals of history half as glorious as the great Chozha Empire.

“Now you have heard the two voices in my mind. A third comes from King
Kochenganaar, Adithya Chozha, and the saintly King, Kandaraathithar. Their
voice is quite different from the other two. They want me to serve the Lord.
They want me to build huge temples for Lord Shiva, temples whose towers are
as tall as the mythological Meru Mountain.

“Holy One, I am caught in the contradicting commands coming from my
ancestors. At times I am disturbed by these three different sets of voices so much
that I really want to renounce this world and become a Buddhist monk. Please
tell me about Buddhism. Please tell me about Lord Buddha.”

The Chief Monk’s face blossomed into a beautiful smile.

“You know about our religion and Lord Buddha. I don’t think there is anything I
can tell you, which you do not already know.”

"For starters you may explain the paintings on the wall over there. I see a Prince
waking up in the middle of the night and getting ready to go. What does that
depict? Who is the woman who is sleeping next to him? Who’s the child in the
cradle? Why should the handsome Prince look so sad?”

“Prince, like you, Lord Buddha was born as a Prince - Siddhartha - and grew up
in a Royal family. He married Yashodhara, a woman of matchless beauty. They
had a son. Siddhartha’s father was looking forward to pass on the mantle to him.
Siddhartha saw the suffering in the world – old age, disease and death. He
wanted to do something about it. In order to help people and relieve them of
their suffering he decided to go away from his country, from his family, from his
beautiful wife and only son. On that fateful day he left everything behind him. It
was midnight. And the artist has captured that poignant scene here. Haven’t you
heard of this story?”

“Yes, Master. I have heard the story a thousand times. But when I see it depicted
in this beautiful painting it moves me a lot. Whatever I heard from people did
not register in my mind. But this painting disturbs me a lot. I want to wake up
Yashodhara and warn her, “Lady, Siddhartha is leaving you! Try to stop him!”
Now please tell me about the next painting.”

The Chief Monk then explained the paintings on the wall one by one. The
Buddhist Monk had a secret longing – of having the talented Prince
Arulmozhivarman in his religious fold. And that longing came through in his
over-enthusiastic voice as he explained the life history of Lord Buddha as
portrayed in those paintings.

Finally the Monk came to the painting which showed Buddha getting
enlightenment under the Bodhi Tree. The Chief Monk’s description was tender
and emotional.

Ponniyin Selvan broke his reverie:

“Oh Holy One, will you be offended if I say something against your views?”

“Prince, I have won over the five senses. I have mastered the art of controlling
my mind. You are free to voice your opinion.”

“I don’t believe that Siddhartha became enlightened under the Bodhi tree.”

The Chief Monk had no doubt won over his senses and his mind. And yet his
face fell.

“Prince, a branch of that blessed Maha Bodhi tree was brought to Srilanka
during the reign of Emperor Asoka. That was more than a thousand years ago.
The branch planted in Anuradhapura in Srilanka has grown into a large tree with
a number of branches. You must have seen that holy tree in Anuradhapura. And
even then you say that that you don’t believe in Buddha’s enlightenment.”

“Gurudeva, I do not deny the existence of the Bodhi tree. I don’t even deny the
fact that Siddhartha meditated under that tree. But I refuse to accept the
statement that Buddha became enlightened there. His enlightenment process
started when he was disturbed by the sufferings of people. I strongly believe that
Buddha was enlightened on the day when he left his wife and child and
sacrificed his kingly life to find a way to end the suffering of people. I have not
heard of a more magnificent sacrifice in the whole of history and mythology.
Lord Rama sacrificed the throne to honour the commitment given by his father.
Rama’s brother Bharatha gave up the throne out of his love for his brother. King
Harischandra gave up his kingdom to fulfil his promise. Emperor Sibi gave his

flesh to save the life of a dove which had sought refuge in him. But Prince
Siddhartha had no such provocation. He had not given word to anyone. Nor was
there any need to please anybody. And yet to alleviate the sufferings of humanity
he sacrificed everything without any provocation or compulsion. After having
got enlightenment under the celebrated Bodhi tree did Buddha do anything half
as glorious as sacrificing everything for the good of humanity? So is it wrong to
say that Lord Buddha was enlightened on the day he left his kingly life for the
sake of humanity?”

The Chief Monk was immensely pleased. The words of the Prince tasted sweet.
And yet he offered a weak defence.

“I don’t deny your version, Prince. Yet it was only when Lord Buddha sat under
the Bodhi tree a great revelation came on him. The way to remove the sufferings
of people was revealed to him at that time. It was only from then on did Buddha
start preaching people about life and suffering.”

“Swami, I have heard the teachings of Lord Buddha. His act of sacrificing a rich,
happy personal life for the sake of people is his most powerful teaching. Yes, his
sacrifice is more powerful than all his teachings. Please forgive me, Gurudeva. I
want to follow Lord Buddha. Do you remember the three different voices of my
ancestors I was talking to you about? Well, I want to be free from those internal
voices of my ancestors. Will you please accept me as your disciple, Master?”

"Prince, let me very frank. To have somebody like you as my disciple I should
be very fortunate. But I neither have the qualification nor the courage to accept
you as my disciple. You may have to request the Federation of Buddhists in
Srilanka.”

“I don’t have any doubts about your qualifications. But I don’t understand what

you said about your courage,”

“Yes, I don’t have the courage. A rumour has been spreading fast in the town of
Nagapattinam for the past two days. I don’t know who or what started it. They
say that you are now in our monastery and we are trying hard to make you a
Buddhist monk. And this has infuriated people. There is a talk going around that
people may storm our monastery soon to find out the truth.”

“That’s plain madness. Why they should be bothered about my embracing
Buddhism? Why should they worry if I wear saffron robes and adopt the life of
an ascetic? I am not even married. They can’t even blame me that I have let my
family in the lurch and have become a monk.”

“Their fury is not on you, Prince, but on us. They think that we have been trying
to deceive you to convert you to our religion and to make you a monk. A mere
rumour has caused this kind of a stir. If it becomes true the people will invade us
and destroy this monastery. Thanks to your father’s benevolence, we are leading
peaceful lives at present. Do you know our daily prayer, Prince?

May the holy shadow of the Bodhi tree spread everywhere.

May the strength, power and beauty of the great King Sundara Chozha grow
every day.

We don’t want to mess up our blessed lives. That’s why I said I don’t have the
courage to accept you as my disciple.”

No sooner than the Chief Monk uttered these words, voices of people were heard
outside the monastery.

The Monk listened to them for a while and spoke in a voice of despair.

“Prince, it looks like people have arrived in large numbers as if to prove my
words. I don’t know how I am going to manage this. May Lord Buddha show me
the way.”

Thousands of people had gathered outside the Choodamani Monastery. Their
voices and tempers were rising every moment.

Chapter 2: Let Murugaiyyan Come!

The Chief Monk of Choodamani Monastery in Nagapattinam and Prince
Arulmozhivarman were listening to the racket caused by the crowd assembled at
the gates of the monastery. It resembled the sound of lashing sea waves.

Prince Arulmozhivarman felt guilty.

“Oh Holy One I feel bad that I am the reason for this embarrassment.”

“Don’t worry, Prince. We are eager to suffer a hundred times more than this for
your sake. Even then we would not have repaid a thousandth of what you and
your family have done for us.”

“Leave that, Oh Holy One. Why should we hide things from people? Why
should we tell lies? When I am there inside the monastery why should you tell
them that I am not here? Thanks to your kind treatment I am fully cured now. Let
me reveal myself to the people and tell them the truth. I shall tell them that you
gave refuge to me when I was sick. I am alive today because of your treatment
and tender care. Let not this great Choodamani Monastery earn a bad name on
my account.”

“There’s nothing untruthful in this, Prince. Your enemies are desperate to know
where you are. I am sure that they propagated these rumours and have instigated
the people against this monastery. In these special circumstances there is nothing
wrong in keeping your hiding place a secret. Kings have to hide themselves at
times for general good. Didn’t the great Pandavas of Mahabharatha hide

themselves for a year? Do you mean to say that Yudhistir went against the
principles of Dharma?”

“Master, I know about your wisdom and about your powers of persuasion. I
can’t win over you in this argument or for that matter in any argument. And yet I
want to add that the Pandavas went into hiding because that was the condition
imposed by the Kauravas. I am not bound by any such condition, Acharya. You
talked about my enemies. Who are they? Why are they against me? I don’t have
any desire to rule this Kingdom. I don’t want the Chozha throne. I am going to
share this with my enemies and make them my friends. I will not be a nuisance
to you any longer. If people are happy to see me alive let them be.”

“You are right, Prince. If I were in your place I would have done the same thing.
But I am helpless in your case because of the promise I have given to your sister.
You have told me that there has been nobody in your Chozha clan who can
match the intelligence of your elder sister, Kunthavai. I fully endorse your views
with this difference – there has never been an intelligent lady like her in any of
the Royal clans I know. She has asked me to keep you here and take care of you
till further orders. She would not have taken that decision without some
compelling reasons.

We hear that some chieftains have hatched a conspiracy against the family of
Emperor Sundara Chozhan. We also hear about the conspiracies of the deposed
Pandya king’s family who are working to usurp your father’s rule. The crowd
gathered outside the monastery is furious over us; because people think that we
are helping those evil powers. Do you think this is the right time and right place
to reveal yourself? Think it over. We don’t mind getting hurt in the mission of
saving your precious life. Nothing can make me go back on the word I have
given to your sister.”

Ayoung monk came running in.

“Swami, the matter has gone beyond our control. Thousands of people are
gathered at the gates of our monastery. And the crowd is swelling by the second.
We have told them several times, ‘The Prince is not in our monastery.’ They
don’t believe us, Swami. They want to come inside and see for themselves.
Unless we do something to convince them they will enter the monastery by force
and then only Lord Buddha can save us.”

“What can we do?”

The Prince intervened.

“Gurudeva, I have an idea. Your disciples have told the people that I am not
here. Now if I go out and stand before the people it will make your disciples
liars. That might even infuriate them more.”

“That will happen for sure. We will have to face the music. I don’t think we have
a choice in this matter.”

“Wait, Oh Holy One. There is another alternative. What if I make your disciples’
words come true?”

“I don’t think you can, Prince. They have already spoken. How can you make
their words come true?”

“Simple, Master. What if I go out of your monastery before people come inside

to look for me?”

“Oh My God! Do you want us to betray you to your enemies to save our skins?
No. I won’t let that heinous sin be committed so long as I am alive.”

“There is no sin in this, Gurudeva. About four miles from here there is a place
called Anaimangalam. There is a Chozha palace in that place. A few days ago I
went there to see my sister. I went through the water canal that runs behind the
Monastery. I’ll use the same route now. I will stay there till all this commotion
dies down.”

The Chief Monk liked the idea but had his doubts.

“That’s a good idea. You need not reveal yourself now. On our part we can be
true to the word we gave your sister. But there is a problem, Prince. There might
be people standing near the canal and if they see you, you’ll be in danger.”

The young monk offered a suggestion.

“Gurudeva, I have another idea. Let us tell them that only one person in the
crowd can come inside to look out for the Prince.”

“But one person is more than enough to cause trouble. He is sure to find the
Prince and he will tell others. And then we will be in for greater trouble.”

“Let’s delay as much as we can. And then it will be dark. The Prince can safely
go out through the canal. And then let’s call their representative to come in and
check. There is another factor in our favour, Master. There is likely to be a big
storm soon. I can see the signs all over the sea. The waves are as high as the
mountains now. The sea is getting turbulent with every passing minute. I don’t
know what’s there in the mind of Lord Buddha. Perhaps he thinks that this
natural disaster will solve all our problems.”

“Don’t ever talk like that. Do you want a storm that will wreak havoc to people
just to solve our problems? That is the height of selfishness.”

The Prince intervened once again.

“Oh Holy One, I want to try the way suggested by your disciple. If a single man
comes in perhaps I can talk to him and change his mind.”

“Two days back a boat man and his wife came here to enquire about the Prince. I
learn that they are from the coastal town of Kodikkarai. The boat man’s wife
made a ruckus at the monastery gates.”

“Oh My God! Who is that boat man? Do you know his name?”

“I do. His name is Murugaiyyan. He told me that he is the son of Thiyaga
Vidangar.”

“I know him very well. He will never go against my word. But why didn’t you

bring him to me?”

“We thought that his loquacious wife cannot keep our secret safe. Right now he
and his wife are in the crowd.”

“That solves the problem. Call the boat man in. He will never go against me.
And we will ask him to come again in the night to take me to the Chozha Palace
in Anaimangalam through the canal.”

“We can’t trust anybody in these troubled times. I am sure that the boat man and
his wife are the ones who spread rumours about your being here in this
monastery.”

“That’s all right. See, somebody has to come inside the monastery to verify. Let
Murugaiyyan come. I know that he is henpecked. But he will never go against
my wishes. He won’t even listen to his wife when it concerns me. Please try to
bring him in.”

The Chief Monk nodded. The young monk went out to execute the orders.
Silence reigned for a while. Then the Chief Monk spoke in a troubled voice.

“Somehow I feel restless, Prince. Let me go out and see. Let me gauge what’s
there in the mind of people. Any lapse on my part should not hurt you or this
ancient monastery.”

The Chief Monk silently walked away from the Prince.

Chapter 3: The Storm!

The otherwise composed Chief Monk was unsettled by what he saw at the gates
of his monastery. Thousands of people had gathered. They appeared very
agitated and highly charged; almost on the verge of physical violence. Many in
the crowd were armed – some with swords, some with spears and some with
thick sticks.

Some were even armed with axes. If the monks did not yield they were perhaps
ready to demolish the monastery. The feelings of the people were quite
understandable.

Ever since the days of Emperor Paranthaka, the Chozha Kingdom was at war
with Lanka. Many of the Chozha warriors had died in the Lankan wars. That
explained a general hatred towards Srilanka. When we hate something we tend
to hate everything that is connected to it, even if the connection was very remote.
The people of Chozha Kingdom hated Srilanka. Naturally they hated Buddhism
which was the widely followed religion in that country. Even a small, vague
excuse was more than enough to vent out their anger on Lanka by showing it on
the Buddhist Monasteries and monks in Tamilnadu.

The Chief Monk knew that there could not be a more opportune moment for
them to demonstrate their hatred towards Buddhism. Someone with evil
intentions must have inflamed the feelings of these innocent people, thought the
Monk. And there was no way to escape the wrath of the masses except by the
grace of Lord Buddha.

The crowd erupted on seeing the Chief Monk.

“Give us back our dear Prince, the darling of our hearts, our Ponniyin Selvan. Or
else, you had it. We will raze the monastery to the ground.”

People cried in chorus. It resembled the sound of the waves in the ocean. The
noise of the waves coming from the real ocean on the other side was increasing
every moment. The sea too was in a state of eruption.

The young monk was right. A great storm was raging. It was moving fast
towards the land and might cross the shore anytime. The monastery might
possibly be saved from this angry mob. But would it survive the wrath of the
ocean? The Chief Monk did not want to know.

The young monk had to an extent silenced the crowd.

“Dear people of Nagapattinam, I have brought my master, the Chief Monk of
this Choodamani Monastery before you. I request you to be silent for some time.
All of you cannot enter the monastery at the same time. You name one or two
volunteers amongst you. Let those volunteers come into the monastery and
search for the Prince. And you should accept the words of those volunteers. Is
this acceptable?”

The crowd roared its acceptance of the deal.

“Tell me who is going to come with me into the monastery?”

Hundreds of people volunteered. There was commotion again.

The young monk silenced them once again and spoke to them in a soft voice.

“What’s the point in shouting like this? You will have to choose a person
amongst you. I will help you make the choice. Is there anybody among you who
has seen the Prince in the last one month? Let us give preference to those who
has seen the Prince recently. It will be easy for him to recognise the Prince if he
sees him.”

Rakkammal (daughter-in-law of Thiyaga Vidangar, the caretaker of the light
house at Kodikkarai) who was in the front came forward.

“Yes, we have seen the Prince.”

The young monk ignored her and talked to her husband Murugaiyyan standing
near her.

“Is she right?”

“Not completely, Swami.” Murugaiyyan’s voice was firm.

“She has not seen the Prince in the recent past. I saw him in Srilanka last month.
I even fell at his feet and sought his forgiveness for the unintentional harm I
caused him. He forgave me. His smile is deeply etched in my memory. It seems

as though it happened yesterday. I can easily recognise the Prince if I see him.”

“Then you are the right person for the job. After all your wife is not totally
wrong. If you had seen the Prince it is as good as her seeing him too. She should
have thought on those lines while offering to be a volunteer. So if you come into
the monastery, search for the Prince, and then tell these people that he is not
there, your wife will accept your word. You know a monastery is a place where
monks are doing penance. It has been a long established rule that women are not
allowed to enter a monastery. I am sure you wife also knows this rule. You alone
come forward.”

The young monk got down the steps and grabbed Murugaiyyan’s hand and
almost dragged him to the steps. He stood on the topmost step and spoke to the
crowd -

“Did you hear? This person, a boat man by name Murugaiyyan, has seen the
Prince recently. I am taking him in. He will be allowed to go all around the
monastery. He will come back and share his findings with you. Is that okay?”

The voice of acceptance was not forthcoming. At best it was a meek acceptance.
They just murmured ‘OK’.

Those who agreed to the arrangement were engaged in a hush hush conversation
with those near them.

“I hope that we are not taken for a ride.” Almost everyone had those doubts.

The young monk noticed the lack of confidence in the crowd.

"Our Chief Monk is here before you. If you have any doubts you may ask him.
Meanwhile I will take this man inside the monastery and show him around.”

The young monk and the boat man disappeared into the monastery.

The majestic appearance of the Chief Monk and his face that shone with love
and peace silenced the crowd to an extent. Nobody dared to ask irreverent
questions to the saint.

The Chief Monk saw the people before him. Beyond the people he saw the
raging ocean.

“My dear people, I know what is there in your mind. It was only today that I
came to know the kind of love you have for our Emperor’s son, our dear
Ponniyin Selvan. My love for the Prince is no less than yours. When I first heard
the news that he was drowned I stood here in this same place and was crying for
a long time. Anyone who is connected with Buddhism cannot but love the
Prince. He has done so much for us - Buddhist monks.

“He ordered the renovation of our monasteries and sthoopas in Anuradhapura in
Srilanka, which is a holy place of pilgrimage for us Buddhists. These sacred
buildings had been in ruins ever since the end of the rule of the Buddhist kings.
Tell me how can we even think of hurting such a benevolent Prince? We can’t,
even in our wildest dreams, join hands with anybody who wants to hurt our
beloved Prince Arulmozhivarman. Ever since we heard the death news of the
Prince we have been constantly praying that it should be false. We have been

relentlessly praying for the well-being of Ponniyin Selvan. Our love for the
Prince is much greater than yours; and there are strong reasons for that.”

A person from the crowd came forward to speak.

“That’s precisely what we are afraid of, Oh Holy One. If your love for our Prince
goes beyond reason then you may shave his head, dress him up in saffron robes
and make him a Buddhist monk. We can’t even think of seeing our future King
in the robes of a monk. That makes us tremble in fear, Oh Holy One.”

His words were greeted by a sarcastic laughter.

The Chief Monk was clearly offended. And his response was passionate. He
knew that there was only one way to clear the doubt in the minds of people.
Whatever was there in his mind came out in the form of a vow.

“I won’t request the Emperor’s son, Ponniyin Selvan, our beloved Prince
Arulmozhivarman to convert to Buddhism. Even if he wants to convert I won’t
let him. He is born to rule a great country. He lives forever in your hearts. I
won’t be that heartless to shave his head and dress him in the saffron robes of a
Buddhist monk. Neither will I ever venture to do such an act nor will ever be an
accomplice to such a crime. This I promise on the lotus feet of Lord Buddha who
is everything to me. Buddham Gachaami! Dharmam Gachaami! Sangam
Gachaami!

The Chief Monk roared to a stunned audience. The passion in his voice, his
sincerity in taking such a terrible vow pacified the people and brought out a big
change in them. There were tears in the eyes of many. Silence prevailed for a

while.

The Chief Monk continued.

“I understand the love you have for Prince Arulmozhivarman. Your worries
about the safety of Ponniyin Selvan might have gone by now. And now it is time
to worry about your house, your people and your belongings. Dear people, it
seems that a storm of unprecedented ferocity is nearing the coast. Turn around
and have a look at the raging sea.”

The people obeyed. They had never witnessed such a scene in their lives. They
were surprised. No, they were shocked beyond words. A frightening dance of
Nature was being enacted over the sea. The waves were so high that for a
moment it appeared that the waves yearned to kiss the black clouds. . Every
wave appeared like a huge black mountain of water. The water mountains were
not stationary. They were moving towards the shore, towards the people, towards
the busy city. If ever the moving mountains reached them, not only the people
but the entire monastery will be engulfed in water in no time.

The Chief Monk spoke again.

“Look at your city.”

The city of Nagapattinam was a little north of Choodamani Monastery. The city
spread over a large area. Next to the sea shore were a lot of shops and toll plazas.
And past them for about three miles, there were rows and rows of houses in all
the directions.

The sea had entered the busy area full of shops and toll plazas. Water was
entering the streets of the city. The anchored boats and ships were being tossed
on the top of the moving water mountains. They were swinging left and right.
The sails attached to the ships could not withstand the force of the winds and
were torn and mutilated.

“Dear people, we have heard that the ancient Tamil town of
Kaveripoompattinam was submerged in the sea many centuries ago. May Lord
Buddha save our town of Nagapattinam from similar fate. On my part I urge you
to return to your place to save your people and belongings.”

The Chief Monk spoke in a choked voice.

The crowd dispersed fast and started moving towards the town. Those who stood
on the periphery started running. Others followed them. First they moved
together. Then they started running scattered in all the directions. Within a few
minutes the place was completely deserted.

"The boat man’s wife Rakkammal was standing alone.

“My husband! My husband!” – she shouted.

“Your husband is safe. He will come back to you in due time. Now run to save
your life.” The Chief Monk’s admonition was soft.

“No, no. How can I go without my husband? Impossible. Let me also get into the
monastery.”

“You can’t. A woman cannot enter the place where monks are living. Don’t you
know that?”

Meanwhile a person who had opted not to run along with the crowd came near
Rakkammal and whispered into her ears. He then grabbed her hand and dragged
her away. She went off reluctantly with him.

“Who is this man? What kind of relationship does he have with this woman?”

With these thoughts still lingering in his mind the Chief Monk entered the
monastery. He went to the Prince.

Meanwhile Murugaiyyan had experienced the shock and surprise of seeing the
Prince alive and was now reverentially listening to every word coming from
him.

“Muruga! You have to come back tonight and take me by boat to
Anaimangalam.”

The Chief Monk intervened.

“Prince, you need not have to wait till night. The crowd has dispersed. You can

leave this place now.”

He then described what happened outside. The Prince now had a different idea.

“Now that the crowd has gone away why should I leave the monastery?”

“What’s the guarantee that the crowd will not be back? Moreover didn’t you tell
me that you are going to make our words come true? Please do it, Prince.”

In the heart of hearts the Chief Monk did not want to get rid of the Prince. He
only wanted to save him from the impending danger. Something told him that
that the monastery will be submerged in floods in a short while. He wanted to
save the Prince. Anaimangalam was a little farther away from the sea. Even if
the sea were in a state of extreme turbulence the waves could not reach
Anaimangalam. Even if they did, the huge Chozha Palace which was built on
high ground would be safe.

The Prince accepted his suggestion. Orders were given to bring a boat for the
Royal guest.

The Chief Monk gathered all the monks and spoke to them.

“We all belong to Lord Buddha who is nothing but love. A disaster is about to
strike the people of Nagapattinam. I saw the sea water entering the city. Because
of the strong winds many houses have lost their roofs. Trees are falling down.
Many aged people and children may be stranded in floods. You go in all the

directions and help people as much as you can. Give priority to children and old
people. Try to save as many as possible from the fury of Sea-God. I am old. I
will stay here and complete the evening rituals.”

The monks went away. The boat had come. The Prince folded his hands towards
the Chief Monk and took leave of him. He got into the boat. Murugaiyyan too
got in and started rowing. The Chief Monk watched the boat till it was
completely out of sight. His face glowed in extraordinary grace.

Chapter 4: The Nandhi Statue Went Under Water

Murugaiyyan rowed the boat. The only other passenger on board was Prince
Arulmozhivarman. The boat was in the canal that ran close to the Choodamani
Monastery. The Prince noticed that the water level was steadily rising. The boat
was struggling to stay afloat. Murugaiyyan had a hard time steering the boat.
The storm had picked up speed and momentum. Loud cracking noise was heard
as trees on both the sides of the canal were falling one after the other.

The boat reached the Nandhi Mandapam on the way to Anaimangalam Palace.
The Prince saw the huge Nandhi Statue. Water was flowing above the head of
the statue. He shuddered on seeing the ferocity of the raging storm. Suddenly he
thought of something and shouted to the boat man.

“STOP THE BOAT!”

Murugaiyyan could at best arrest only the forward moment of the boat. The
small vessel was wobbling.

The Prince jumped on to the Nandhi Mandapam. The he climbed a fallen tree
and reached the roof. He looked around. The sea had entered the eastern side of
the canal. The scene was apocalyptic. More than half of the coconut trees in the
grove had fallen victims to the storm, and the sea had now entered the coconut
grove.

Prince Arulmozhivarman looked North at the Choodamani Monastery. The sea
had come as far as the steps of the monastery.

A chill went through his spine.

“Murugaiyya, turn the boat. Let’s go back to the monastery. Fast!”

Murugaiyyan was not by nature a very talkative person. And he virtually
worshipped Ponniyin Selvan. He implicitly obeyed the Prince’s command. He
made a U-turn and started rowing towards the Monastery.

The return journey was completed much faster than the onward journey. But to
the disturbed Prince it seemed otherwise. When the boat reached the Monastery,
it was surrounded by water on all sides. The water level was steadily going up.
Unlike the Buddhist monasteries of Srilanka, the Choodamani Monastery was
not built on high ground. And if the water level increased any further even the
dome of the building might become submerged.

The Prince jumped off the boat. He landed on the terrace which fortunately was
above the water level. He ran around. He searched through all the rooms on the
second level above the ground. The ground level was water-logged. Some of the
rooms on the second level had water up to one’s chest. The Prince had to wade
through the water.

He did not find what he was looking for. He was disappointed.

Finally he reached the place where Gautama Buddha’s statue was. Water had
risen to the level of Buddha’s chest. The Prince stood there and looked around.
He also looked under the water. And soon a sound of happiness and surprise

escaped from his mouth, for he had found what he wanted.

Yes, beneath the statue of Lord Buddha sat the Chief Monk tightly gripping the
lotus feet of the Lord. Ponniyin Selvan dove into water, removed the Chief
Monk’s hands from the statue using great force and lifted him up. It was easy to
lift the Chief Monk when he was under water. But when he came out of the
water, the Prince found it hard to carry the well-built Buddhist monk.

“Murugaiyya! Murugaiyya!” The Prince screamed.

“I am here, Your Majesty.”

Murugaiyyan brought the boat closer. The Prince carried the Chief Monk and
walked towards the boat. His feet staggered under water.

Chapter 5: The Marooned Calf

Prince Arulmozhivarman carried the Chief Monk to the boat. When he jumped
into it the boat wobbled so much that for a moment it appeared that it would
sink. Murugaiyyan took great efforts to keep the boat afloat.

“Start rowing. Go to Anaimangalam Palace. Come on! We don’t have all the
time in the world.” The Prince shouted at the top of his voice.

Even then Murugaiyyan could not hear him. But he read the Prince’s intentions
from his face. He started rowing. It was an ordeal to row the boat through the
pointed domes of the sinking monastery and the huge Buddha statues.
Murugaiyyan was a seasoned boat man. He had been rowing since his childhood
and had rowed through many a storm. He brought all his skills to the fore.

The Prince was amazed. First he wanted to help the boat man; but to do that he
had to leave the monk for at least a few minutes. The Prince hesitated. He was in
two minds. As if to help him come to a decision, the monk tried to free himself
from the hands of the Prince. The boat was now close to the Buddha’s statue in
the monastery. The water had risen up to the eyes of Lord Buddha. In a few
minutes the statue would be under water.

The Prince’s hold on the monk was very strong. The Chief Monk was surprised.
He never imagined that the hands of the soft-looking and the soft-spoken Prince
could wield so much power. And his surprise clearly showed on his face. He
then convinced himself that the strength of the body came from the heart. And
that principle applied even to a body weakened by several days of fever.

The boat passed the Buddha statue. The Chief Monk was staring at the sinking
statue for a long time. Soon the statue disappeared from view. Tears streamed out
of the Monk’s eyes.

"Why did you do that, Prince?”

The Monk’s voice was barely audible. The Prince read the Monk’s lips. He bent
down and spoke in a whisper:

“Holy One, it is my turn to ask that question. Why did you do that, Master?”

“Prince, this Choodamani Monastery has been here for more than five hundred
years. It was here even during the times of Saint Dharma Pada. The Pallava
Kings, who are otherwise fanatic Saivites, left this huge structure undisturbed.
Such an ancient Monastery has gone under water during my time before my
eyes. The Monastery is built of bricks. It can’t escape the fury of a sea in storm.
Once the storm recedes we’ll see nothing but broken walls. I don’t have the heart
to see our beloved Choodamani Monastery in ruins...”

“Holy One, if the monastery is destroyed we can have it rebuilt. And if Lord
Buddha wishes I’ll have the privilege of renovating this ancient monastery. But
if you are gone how I can or for that matter anybody, bring you back, Master?”

The sea and the raging storm did not let them continue the argument. The drama
of destruction that was being enacted around them rendered them speechless.

Huge ships with broken sails and small fishing boats were being thrown towards
the shore. Many of them hit the ground or dashed against the buildings or trees
and were smashed to smithereens. The hurricane had taken off the roofs of many
homes. The wind carried these roofs to the water. Some of the roofs made of
dried leaves were floating on the sea. And people stranded in the storm were
frantically holding on to these roofs to stay afloat. They were crying for help.

Massive trees had been violently uprooted. Some of the fallen trees were floating
in water. And the branches served as life boats to a few people caught in the
flash floods. Cows and sheep were being carried along the flow of water. The
pathetic cries coming from the farm animals were heart-rending. The Chief
Monk and the Prince forgot their own worries; their hearts bled for the people
stranded in the flash floods. They were upset because they could not be of any
help.

Murugaiyyan focused on his rowing carefully avoiding the distraction caused by
these heart-wrenching sights. He steered the boat towards Anaimangalam. The
Choodamani Monastery was very close to the beach. The canal ran from
Monastery down south and then turned South West. It ran in that direction for
about five miles and then turned south once again. The Chozha Palace of
Anaimangalam was near this second turn towards South.

The boat passed the Nandhi Mandapam on the way to the Palace. The statue of
Nandhi was fully submerged in water. The water had now reached the edge of
the Mandapam. The Mandapam was surrounded by a coconut grove. Most of the
trees had fallen. The remaining trees swayed violently in the winds. It appeared
as if the tall trees were staging a ghostly dance. The fronds had been torn off the
trees by the hurricane and they were carried for a long distance.

At the top of the Nandhi Mandapam a calf which had been separated from her

mother was clinging on to the wall. It was frightened. It was shivering in cold
and fear. Its legs were shaking. The weak voice coming from the calf reached the
ears of those in the boat.

The Prince was worried about the safety of the stranded calf. At the same time a
large coconut tree fell on the back of the Mandapam. If the tree had fallen a few
feet towards the front the calf would have been killed under it.

The fall of the tree caused a huge wave which started moving fast towards the
Nandhi Mandapam. The trembling calf was overwhelmed by the wave; it could
no longer cling on to the Mandapam. It fell on water and was being carried away
by the moving floods.

The Prince who was holding the Chief Monk left him for a few seconds. The
Monk was waiting for that chance. In a flash he plunged into water.

Murugaiyyan abandoned the oars and grabbed the Prince. The Prince was
furious. “Leave me. LEAVE ME, I SAY.”

Meanwhile the Monk swam towards the calf. He grabbed the animal’s front feet
and held them firmly. The calf was struggling hard to keep its head above water.
The Monk dragged the calf towards the boat. The Prince offered his hand to the
Monk and helped him get into the boat. The two men first lifted the calf to
safety. Only then the Monk got into the boat.

The calf lost its balance and fell down in the boat. The Monk sat near the calf
and placed its head on his lap. Then he gently patted the frightened animal.

“Gurudeva, a short while ago you tried to kill yourself by holding on to the feet
of Lord Buddha. If you had succeeded in your attempt you could not have saved
this poor animal.”

“I am deeply indebted to you, Prince. You prevented me from committing a great
sin. Saving the life of this calf has calmed my nerves. I won’t be worried even if
the Choodamani Monastery is destroyed by floods.”

"Acharya, you feel peaceful because you were able to save the life of a single
calf. How many people are suffering by these floods? How many lives are in
danger? Thousands of people, including women, children and the old are
fighting for their lives. I don’t know how many animals – cows, sheep, horses –
and how many birds are going to be killed by this natural calamity. How can we
remedy this suffering Gurudeva?”

“Prince, our capabilities are limited. There are only certain things which we can
do. We do not have the power to avert natural calamities. Can we block the
hurricane? Or stop the rains? Or can we bring the rains? When the sea rages
towards the shore in a state of turbulence can we arrest its flow? I have seen the
volcanoes erupting in the countries beyond the Eastern seas. I have seen the
earth caving in during a massive earthquake. What can we do about them?
Nothing. We can at the most help the people in distress.”

“Why should natural calamities occur, Master? Why should we have a storm or
an earthquake? Why should we have an epidemic? Who or what makes people
suffer? I do agree that we as frail human beings can’t avert these calamites. But
can’t even God do that? If he can, why should he let people suffer?”

“My dear Ponniyin Selva! Yours is a question that has been haunting people for
centuries. Sages have been trying to answer the question for a very long time.
But none of the answers are convincing. That was the reason Lord Buddha
refused to talk about God. He did not want any discussion on God. And this is
the crux of his teachings: ‘Do your best to alleviate the sufferings of others. That
and that alone can give you real happiness. That happiness will take you to the
state of nirvana.’ “

The boat turned west from Nandhi Mandapam and was now heading towards
Anaimangalam. The Prince was lost in thoughts. He compared the teachings of
Buddha with those of his ancestors.

The two great religions of the country – Saivism and Vaishnavism – emphasised
the importance of helping others. He remembered the popular Sanskrit adage
“paropahaartham idham sareeram” – the sole purpose of being born with a
body is to help others.

At the same time our ancestors also insisted on believing an all-powerful God
and the duty of being devoted to such a God. And that God was portrayed as the
God of Destruction, or Samhaara Murthy and was worshipped as Rudra or
Shiva. God was worshipped as God of Love, of compassion in the form of
Vishnu. God was worshipped as woman as well. She was at times worshipped as
a loving Mother, the Uma Maheswari and at times as the frightening Rana
Bhadra Kali, the Goddess of Destruction. How can God assume these extreme
forms? Why not? A mother hugs her child and fondles her. But at times she is
furious with her child and punishes her. The child cannot understand her
mother’s fury. Simply because the mother punishes her child we cannot deny
mother’s love.

When the boat reached the Chozha Palace at Anaimangalam it was dark. The
raging sea had not reached the Palace. Murugaiyyan stopped the boat near the
decorated steps that led to the Palace. Mother Nature had been compassionate

towards the passengers in the boat. In spite of the raging storm and mighty winds
there had been no rain till then. There was just a pleasant drizzle. The moment
the boat stopped near the Palace the rains started.

There was a guard at the gates of the Palace holding a flaming torch in his hand.
He was talking to the people who had sought refuge in the Palace for the night.
When he saw the boat he held up the torch. He saw the Prince. He abandoned
everything else and ran towards the steps.

Meanwhile the Prince and the Chief Monk got down from the boat. The calf
was gently lifted and placed on the steps. The Palace Guard was about to fall at
the feet of the Prince. But the Prince pre-empted that move. The torch fell in the
canal and after a moment’s glow disappeared.

“Your Majesty, I was worried about the safety of the Choodamani Monastery. I
am relieved to see you here.”

“Oh! You knew I was there?”

“Yes, Your Majesty. I came to know when Princess Kunthavai and Princess
Vanathi were here to see you. Princess Kunthavai issued strict orders to me not
to reveal the information to anybody.”

“Remember, you will have to continue to obey those orders. Who are those
people?”

“These people belong to the neighbouring villages. The sea has come in. They
want a place to stay for the night. Your Majesty came at the same time. Let me
drive them away.”

“No, don’t do it. Give them place to stay. Let them sleep here for the night. Use
all the materials in the Palace to cook food for them. But don’t breathe a word
about me. Now you will have to take us to the top floor of the Palace without the
knowledge of these people.”

Their entry into the palace was marked by torrential rains accompanied by strong
winds.

Chapter 6: Murugaiyyan Cried

That was an eventful day in the history of Tamilnadu. A tree fell down on the
palanquin whose sole occupant was Mandhakini. At the Veera Narayana Lake a
boat drifted away due to the wind. And so many things happened in
Nagapattinam.

The coastal town of Nagapattinam was in turmoil the whole night. People were
fighting for their dear lives; there had neither the time nor the inclination to help
others. The Buddhist Monks were on the streets and helping as many as they
could.

The Chief Monk and Prince Arulmozhivarman were in the Chozha Palace at
Anaimangalam. They talked till the wee hours of morning. Their hearts bled for
the people caught in the storm, especially those living near the coast.

Prince Arulmozhivarman summoned the care-taker of the Palace and asked him
how much cash and food grains were held in the Palace. The granary was full,
reported the care-taker. As to the amount of money, he said that the Palace had
more than twelve copper pots full of gold coins. The gold had come from Queen
Mother Sembian Madevi to be spent to renovate the Neelayadakshi Temple at a
place called Thirunaagai Kaaronam.

The Prince then spoke to the Chief Monk.

“Acharya, you can please Lord Buddha by serving the people. We have the
necessary means now. You can use all the grains in the palace to prepare food for

the poor. You may give away the gold coins to those who have lost their homes
in the floods.”

“It’s not fair, Prince. Yes, we can use the grains. But the gold coins? Certainly
not. They have been sent by your grandmother Sembian Madevi for temple
renovation work. How can we use it for other purposes? The Queen Mother will
be offended.”

“I can explain the situation to her, Acharya and yes, I can convince her too. Let’s
use the money now. In future I’ll build hundreds of temples for Lord Shiva in
our Kingdom. That will make my grandmother happy. I will build Sthoopas and
pillars which will be so high that even a raging sea cannot come close to them.
In Thanjavur I’ll build a temple so large and so gigantic that people will call that
as Dhakshin Meru or the Meru Mountain of the South. Even if the present
Choodamani Monastery is fully destroyed in floods, you need not have to worry,
Master. I’ll build a much larger Choodamani Monastery in its place. This time
we will have the monastery built on a high ground in granite. The structure will
be so strong that even a storm ten times stronger than this one cannot damage it.”

The Prince was passionate in his promise.

“Ponniyin Selva! I am quite excited by the passion you have in building temples
and monasteries. God bless you.”

“Yes, Acharya. I am sure my Lord wants me to do many great things in life. That
was the reason He saved me from so many dangers. See what happened today.
This boat man Murugaiyyan came at the right time. Otherwise you and I would
have been stranded inside the flooded monastery. We would not have thought
that the sea would turn as turbulent as to sink the whole building.”

“It’s true, Prince. What did not happen during the past five hundred years
happened in just one afternoon. Who could have expected that? You, Prince,
were saved by the grace of Lord Buddha. And the same Buddha saved my life
through you. And I now see the rationale behind your idea to spend the temple
renovation money for the people. If you had wanted to spend the money from
the Royal Treasury, the Chancellor would have put his foot down and refused.
But your grandmother will not be offended by your act. And you can easily
convince her, Prince. That’s the best way to help the people. I have a suggestion
though. This is going to be a massive relief work. It will be but proper if you do
it with your own hands. A poor ascetic like me cannot handle this kind of a
responsibility.”

“There is a problem, Acharya. If I want to do this I will have to first reveal
myself. I also remember what you said about the in cognito living of the
Pandava Princes narrated in the Mahabharatha epic. I also remember the
beautiful couplets of the greatest of Tamil poets, Thiruvalluvar.

“Words spoken without evil are the greatest truth.”

“At times even a lie can be better than truth if it benefits others.”

If I reveal myself now it may cause unnecessary confusion in the midst of
people. My elder sister thinks so. Nobody will be hurt if I continue to be in
hiding. Therefore, Acharya, I request you to help the people using of course the
grain and gold stored in this Palace.”

“Ponniyin Selva, my mind has changed. I don’t know why. It appears to me that
this is the right time to reveal yourself and help the people. I am sure that it is the

wish of Lord Buddha as well.”

The two men heard a loud sob. They turned around. The boatman Murugaiyyan
was sitting in a corner. His hands covered his face. He was crying.

The Prince held his hand and brought him to the Monk.

“What is this, Murugaiyyan? Why are you crying?”

“My wife! My wife!” Murugaiyyan was wailing.

Ponniyin Selvan spoke softly to him.

“We are sorry, Murugaiyyan. We have completely forgotten her. I understand
your fears. Its midnight now. And there is nothing we can do. We will start
looking for your wife first thing in the morning.”

“I am not worried about her, Your Majesty. She’d be safe. She has been through
hundreds of storms like this. We are living in the coast, you know.”

“Then why are you crying?”

Murugaiyyan spoke in a choked voice:

“I feel bad that I suspected her intentions. I heard so many things about her. She
was the one who brought me here from Kodikkarai. She was the one who told
me that you should be in Choodamani Monastery. I came here only because she
forced me to come. I was even afraid that she might harm you. I now understand
I am absolutely wrong about her. A few seconds ago, Your Majesty, praised me
sky high. You even told that God saved your life through me. But I did it because
of my wife. And I foolishly suspected the intentions of that noble woman. I am
overwhelmed by guilt, Your Majesty. I could not control my tears.”

The Prince heard his words. He had another thought.

“Your wife is no doubt a noble lady. And you were wrong in doubting her
intentions. But how did she know that I am here?”

“My aunt and my sister Poonkuzhali left for Nagapattinam in a boat. That must
have made her guess you are here.”

“Which aunt?” – The Prince was suddenly excited.

“The mute lady, the one who saved you from many dangers in the Lankan
Island.”

“Oh My God! Where are they? What happened to your aunt and your sister?
Didn’t you say they came here?”

“Yes, Your Majesty. But their journey was interrupted.”

Murugaiyyan started to cry again.

Ponniyin Selvan was worried. He consoled the boat-man and got all the details
from him. When he learnt that somebody had forcefully kidnapped the Mute
Queen, he was furious. When he came to know that Murugaiyyan’s wife
Rakkammal tried her best to save his aunt and that Rakkammal was left bound to
a tree, his suspicion about the woman vanished. The Prince even respected
Murugaiyyan’s wife for her acts of valour.

“Did you hear that, Acharya? If at all there is somebody in this world whom I
regard as a Goddess, it is that Mute Queen Mandhakini Devi. I can’t bear to see
her hurt by anybody in this world. I can’t forgive those who dream of hurting
her. I’ll annihilate them all. The Pazhuvettaraiyars issued orders to arrest me. I
was not offended. But if they had hurt the Mute Queen, well they had it. I will
never, never forgive them. The first thing I want to do is to completely destroy
the clan of Pazhuvettaraiyars. Even if my own mother and my father had hurt the
Mute Queen I won’t forgive them.

Acharya, I am going to Thanjavur tomorrow. I will travel in the guise of a
merchant. I will take Murugaiyyan with me. I can’t be peaceful till I know that
the Mute Queen is safe. Master, you will have to take charge of this flood relief
project. If you don’t want to do it in your name then do it in the name of the
Mute Queen – I suggest that you may call this Eezhathu Nachiar Trust. That
refers to Queen Mandhakini; but will not be known to those who do not know
her.

“And for your information the Mute Queen loves Buddhism. She normally lives
in the Buddhist Monastery in Ghost Island in Sri Lanka. I am sure you know that

the Island was originally known as Bodha Theevu alluding to the Bodhi Tree
under which Buddha was enlightened. And then the name was changed over
time to Bhoodha Theevu, meaning Ghost Island.”

The Chief Monk agreed.

The next day saw the storm dying down and sea receding to its usual place. But
the havoc it had wrought was beyond description. Half of the houses in the town
had lost their roofs. The Prince, disguised as a trader, was walking down the
street carrying a bag on his shoulders. Behind him was Murugaiyyan carrying a
larger bag. They saw the destruction caused by the natural calamity.

A woman hiding behind a wall of one of the damaged houses saw the two men.
She was Rakkammal, wife of Murugaiyyan. She remained silent till they reached
near her. She then ran out in the street and fell down at the feet of Prince
Arulmozhivarman. Murugaiyyan tried to caution her through sign language. He
almost shouted at her to remain silent. But nothing could stop her.

“Oh My God! Who am I seeing here! Is it the Emperor’s son? The one and only
Ponniyin Selvan! The darling of the people of Chozha Kingdom! Oh My God!
And you escaped unhurt even though Choodamani Monastery has gone under
water! Today is the luckiest day for my eyes for they have seen you in flesh and
blood.”

Rakkammal shrieked. The passersby stopped. Everybody’s attention was now on
the Prince.

Chapter 7: People Rejoice!

Murugaiyyan, the boat man was shocked by his wife’s excitement. He was
frantically waving his hands to stop her. He ran near her and spoke in a loud
whisper: “Idiot! What the hell are you doing? Have you lost your mind, crazy
woman?”

“I am all right. I am not crazy. You are crazy. Your father is crazy. And so is your
grandfather. Can’t you recognize our hero, the one who won over Srilanka and
drove King Mahindan to the mountains? What happened to your eyes? Can’t you
recognise our Emperor’s son, the one who is the darling of the people of this
great Kingdom? Can’t you recognise the blessed being whom Mother Cauvery
gave back to us? Well if he is not our Prince why did you decide to go with this
man? And where to?”

The Prince spoke to her softly: “You are mistaken, Lady. I am a merchant from
Srilanka. I am taking this man as my guide. If you don’t want him to come with
me, it’s all right. But for heaven’s sake don’t create a scene here.”

They were surrounded by curious onlookers. The crowd was swelling in size by
every passing minute. Everyone stared at the Prince.

The boat man’s wife raised her voice: “Oh My God! What happened to our dear
Ponniyin Selvan? Has he lost his mind? Prince, is your brain affected by the
drowning accident? Or those rogues, the Buddhist monks, have they cast a spell
on you to forget your own identity? Or... or... I shudder to think..... are you dead
and the soul of some other person has entered your body? No, it can’t be. Please,
Your Majesty. Please think. You are not a trader. You are the son of our Emperor

Sundara Chozhan. You are born to rule over this world. If you have any doubts
please look at your palms. They will have the conch and disc lines, the sure signs
of a King.”

The Prince covered his palms.

“Won’t you shut up now?”

The Prince then turned to Murugaiyyan.

“What’s this nuisance? Can’t you stop her?”

Murugaiyyan went near his wife and whispered in her ears:

”Rakkamma, please. Please be quiet. The Prince wants to go to Thanjavur in the
guise of a merchant. Please understand.”

“Oh My God! You should have told that first. Didn’t you say that there is no way
that Prince could be in the Monastery? And you still think so, right? Oh My
God! See what I have done! Out of my love for the Prince I have blurted out his
true identity. And those crooks, the Pazhuvettaraiyars are looking for the right
time to arrest him. And here I have almost betrayed the Prince to them. But
Prince, you don’t have to worry. The Pazhuvettaraiyars can’t even touch your
hair. There are millions of people like me and my husband who are ready to lay
down their lives for you.”

She then turned towards the crowd and shrieked:

“I am sure you heard me. And I am sure you agree with me. Is there anybody
who owes allegiance to Pazhuvettaraiyars? Then come forward. Kill me first and
then you may think of harming the Prince.”

The crowd lost control. And then all hell broke loose.

“Hail Ponniyin Selvan! Hail the Warrior Who Won Over Lanka!” The slogans
attracted more crowds. The Prince was surrounded by hundreds of people. One
of them was the Chairman of one of the City Councils. He came forward to greet
the Prince.

“We heard rumours that you stayed in the Choodamani Monastery in our city. At
first we did not believe those rumours. We now know it’s true. Yesterday’s storm
has wrought havoc in the city. And yet we are grateful to the storm for it has
safely brought you out of the Monastery. After seeing you we have forgotten the
storm. We strongly believe that we are specially blessed; for you, our Darling
Prince, have set foot in this city.”

The Prince now knew that there was no point in hiding himself any longer.

“I am moved by your words. I bow down to your love. But I need to go to
Thanjavur on a very urgent work. If I travel in my true identity my journey may
be disrupted and delayed. Hence this guise. Please let me go.”

A voice was heard above the noise of the crowd.

“NO. ABSOLUTELY NOT. WE WON’T LET YOU GO, PRINCE. You will
have to be our guest at least for a day. We want you to accord us the greatest
privilege of serving you for a day.”

This proposal was seconded by almost everyone in the crowd. The City Council
Chairman spoke again:

“Did you see our people’s love and enthusiasm, Your Majesty? We beg of you to
accept our hospitality for a day, at least for a part of a day. Do you think our love
is not as good as that of the Buddhist monks? Yesterday these people suspected
that you were held captive inside the monastery and wanted to raze it to the
ground. There was an unexpected storm. What these people wanted to do the
storm did better. The Monastery has been completely destroyed.”

“No. It’s not fair. Please don’t blame the monks. They kept me inside only
because I requested them to do so. I was sick and was struggling for life. But for
their help, the therapy and the medication they gave me I would have been dead
by now. I owe my life to them. I am deeply hurt to see the monastery destroyed
by the storm. I know it is my duty to rebuild the great monastery. That’s the least
I can do for what they have done to me.”

“Oh My God! We apologize, Prince. We did not know the truth till now, Prince.
We shall at the cost of the City rebuild the Monastery. And in return we beg of
you to stay with us for a day and accept our hospitality.”

“Please! Please! Please!”

The Chairman’s passionate request was seconded by thousands of voices. When
the sound died down he spoke again.

“Prince, staying here for a day might delay your travel plans. But we can make
good the delay. Your original plan was to travel on foot. As you are aware the
roads of Chozha Kingdom are badly damaged due to the storm. All the rivers are
in spate. Many of the roads are waterlogged. It may take several weeks for you
to reach the Capital if you are going to walk the entire distance. You could travel
in style, Your Majesty. We will provide you with an elephant. You can travel like
a King. We will all follow you to Thanjavur.”

The crowd was growing every second.

Arulmozhivarman considered the proposal.

‘Now that the cat is out of the bag, what is the big deal in acceding to their
request? That foolish lady, the boat man’s wife has unwittingly revealed my
identity. She has messed up my plans. I am not sure whether it was mere
foolishness or does she have a dangerous hidden agenda. Whatever it may be it
is impossible to reject the love of these people. I don’t want to hurt these people
by refusing to stay.

Staying here for a day will surely ruin all my plans. But I can use this
opportunity to offer solace to the people who have lost their dear ones and their
belongings in the storm.

I remember the words of my dear sister, Kunthavai. She was sure that revealing
my identity at this time will only complicate things. How true! There is nobody in
this world half as wise as my wonderful sister. People are debating who should
succeed the Emperor. If we decide matters purely on merit Kunthavai is the
fittest person to sit on the Chozha Throne after my father.”

The crowd was growing fast. And its happiness and enthusiasm was growing
even faster. It seemed as if the people had forgotten the havoc caused by the
storm. Elephants, horses, palanquins, flags, drums and other Royal insignia
appeared from nowhere.

The Prince had now made up his mind. He now addressed the City Chairman:

“I do not have the heart to refuse your request. I am moved by your love for me.
I will stay with you for a day. You should let me go in the evening.”

The enthusiasm of the crowd crossed all bounds. And they were looking for
ways to express it. Drums and pipes started playing. People started dancing.
Acrobats and jugglers showed their skills on the street. Swordsman
demonstrated their prowess in mock fights. Several groups of people
demonstrated their traditional mode of dancing, the kuravai koothu.

It was quite an ordeal for the Prince to reach the Chozha Palace in the heart of
the city as there were people everywhere.

Soon the news of his revelation spread like wild fire. People came in droves to
see the apple of their eyes, the one and only Ponniyin Selvan. The Prince could
not relax even for a few minutes in the Palace.

The Prince stepped out of the Palace quite often. He saw the people. He had a
kind word for everyone. He enquired about their well-being, about life in that
coastal town and more particularly about the hardship caused by the storm. He
promised to send relief supplies the moment he reached the capital city,
Thanjavur.

The Prince noticed that the people were not generally enthusiastic.

“Will Pazhuvettaraiyars’ domination come to an end?” That seemed to be the
subject of the hush-hush conversation amongst the people who thronged to see
him. People also hazarded guesses on the health condition of the Emperor and
the possible successor to the Chozha Throne.

Meanwhile the Heads of the Five City Administration Committees and the
Chairmen of all the City Councils came to pay their respects to the Prince.
Elaborate arrangements were made to throw a grand feast in his honour.
Arrangements were also made to provide food for the people who came to see
the Prince. Whatever grains were left in the city’s granaries after the storm were
brought there.

They did not have to worry about greens and vegetables. Thousands of coconut
and plantain trees had fallen during the last night’s storm. The plantains,
coconuts, the plantain stems and leaves alone could be used to host a feast to a
hundred thousand people.

Food was cooked in record time and served to thousands of people.

It was time for the Prince to take leave of the kind people of the coastal town.
The Prince appeared on the terrace of the Palace. He folded his hands towards
the people as a gesture of thanking them for the hospitality and to take leave of
them.

On the street below him everything was set for a long, grand procession. A
decorated pachyderm was in the forefront. That was for the Prince. Bulls and
horses stood in rows before and after the elephant. There were flags and other
royal insignia borne by eager volunteers. Drummers and pipers and bearers of
other musical instruments were part of the procession.

The Prince looked afar, but he could not see the end of the procession. The
procession appeared as infinite as the sea on the other side. And it was as
turbulent as the sea on the previous day.

The Prince posed an elegant smile. But internally he was in great distress. He
was pretty anxious to know about the fate of the Mute Queen, who to him was as
dear as his own mother. He wanted to know more about the Mute Queen from
Murugaiyyan’s wife. But that lady had disappeared in the crowd. Murugaiyyan
however managed to reach the Chozha Palace along with the Prince. Even he did
not know what happened to his wife, Rakkammal.

The Prince had another problem. The Pazhuvettaraiyars had already been
spreading rumours that Prince Arulmozhivarman wanted to usurp the rule of his
father. And if the Prince entered the capital city in a grand procession that would
only vindicate the stand taken by Pazhuvettaraiyars.

The Prince somehow wanted to escape from the clutches of love of the people.
But there was no way. An unexpected development complicated things further.

The Chairmen of the City Councils and the Heads of the Five Committees had
managed to reach the entrance of the Palace. As if on cue the musical
instruments stopped playing. People stopped shouting slogans. Suddenly the
whole area fell silent. To the Prince it appeared as something planned in
advance. One of the senior Administrators climbed up a podium like structure at
the entrance of the Palace and spoke in a firm, majestic voice:

“Ponniyin Selva! Our Beloved Prince! The people of this town and the
surrounding villages have a petition! We are all worried about the health of
Emperor Sundara Chozhan. We are more worried about another rumour doing
rounds in this part of the Kingdom. We learn that the Pazhuvettaraiyars and a
few other Chieftains are conspiring to crown your uncle Madhuranthakan after
your father’s time. Madhuranthakan has not seen a single battlefield till now.
And if he is made the King the Pazhuvettaraiyars will vicariously rule the
Kingdom through him. The whims and fancies of the petty chieftains will
become the law of the land.

Prince Adithya Karikalan has not set foot in Chozha Kingdom for the last three
years. And they say that there are several compelling reasons for his conspicuous
absence. Many say that he is not interested in ruling the country. If that’s true
who is the next heir to the Kingdom? Tell us, Prince, who could possibly
succeed the Emperor? Yes, the one who is the fruit of all our penance, the one
who was personally rescued by Mother Cauvery, the one who conquered
Srilanka and the one and only, Ponniyin Selvan, that’s you, our dear Prince can
be our King and Ruler.”

The Administrator turned towards the people.

“Do you agree with me?”

The crowd erupted. Several thousand voices seconded the Administrator. And
the crowd started shouting slogans in support of the Prince. Soon the voice of the
crowd became one undistinguishable roar, similar to that of a sea in turbulence.

When the Prince started to speak the noise died down suddenly. It appeared as if
the Prince had cast a spell of silence over the raging crowd.

“My dear people, I bow down to your love. But this is not the way to show your
love for me. It seems that you have forgotten the fact that my father is still alive.
You should all join me in my prayer for a long, healthy life for our Emperor. And
when he is alive it is neither fair nor proper to discuss the issue of succession.”

The Senior Administrator who spoke first had anticipated this response from the
Prince.

“Our Beloved Prince, it has been a time-honoured tradition in our country to
name the successor even while the King is alive. I need not have to tell you
Prince – that Emperor Paranthaka who conquered Madurai and adorned the
temple of the Dancing Lord in Thillai with a golden roof, named his successors
in order. Your father became the King only as per the wishes of Emperor
Paranthaka.

“Exactly. In the same way my father alone has the prerogative to name his
successor. It is not proper for you or me to debate on the issue of succession.”

“We agree, Prince. If our Emperor can decide on his own free will, yes, he can

name his successor. He is now being held captive by the Pazhuvettaraiyars at the
Thanjavur Fort. To be frank we even doubt whether the Emperor is actually alive
as of now. We want to come with you to Thanjavur to clear our doubts. And by
God’s grace if our Emperor is alive we will meet him in person and share our
feelings with him. We will present a petition to him begging him to name you as
his successor to the Chozha Throne. We will then leave the matter to him.
Having done that we will be bound by the wishes of our Emperor.”

The Prince shuddered. The Administrator’s doubts regarding the life of the
Emperor disturbed him. The sense of grief and fear that engulfed his mind was
something he had never experienced before. He felt that his father, the Emperor
was in danger and that he was too far away from him to be of any help. He also
remembered the Mute Queen being kidnapped by some rogues. He could not
delay his journey to Thanjavur any longer. In a few seconds he decided on the
course of action. There was no point in continuing the argument with these
people. That would only delay the journey. There was no other alternative but to
agree with the people and start the journey. May be on the way he could think of
some way to escape from the people and travel alone to see his father.

“I agree. Your words make me want to see my father immediately. I will have to
leave now. If you want to see the Emperor you may also come with me. Let’s all
be bound by whatever the Emperor has to say about his successor.”

The Prince came down to the entrance and mounted the elephant. The huge beast
started moving. The long procession comprised of thousands of people started its
epic journey towards the capital city of Thanjavur. Many people joined them on
the way. The procession became longer and longer.

Chapter 8: Pazhuvettaraiyar In A Boat

Pazhuvettaraiyar left for Thanjavur from Kadambur on the day of the storm. He
travelled by the usual route up to the Coleroon River and then travelled west on
the road that ran along the banks of the river. He did not want to go through the
villages of the Kingdom. He wanted to go further west and cross the river near
Thiruvaiyaaru, a small laid back town near Thanjavur.

Pazhuvettaraiyar usually travelled with a large retinue. But this time he made an
exception. There were only ten soldiers with him. He did not want his travel to
attract the attention of anybody.

He rode on the northern banks of River Coleroon near Thiruvaiyaaru. The river
was in spate. Only small boats were available to cross the river. The boats could
not carry the horses. A storm was imminent. The signs were ominous. He left the
horses at the river bank intending to use them for his return journey to
Kadambur. He got into the boat along with his men.

When the boat was in the middle of the river the storm started. Soon it
intensified and started rocking the boat. The boat-men struggled hard to keep the
boat on its course. The force of water pulled the boat towards east. The storm
pulled it in the opposite direction. The boat-men were trying to take it south. The
boat was caught in between these three forces and soon was going in circles.

Agreater storm was raging in the minds of the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. His brain
refused to work in the presence of Nandini. Whatever she told him appeared
right at that time. Even if Nandini told something which he otherwise hated he
would agree in her presence. Even if he had his own doubts his mouth would

murmur an involuntary acceptance. But having accepted her words once, he
never had the heart to go back on his word.

That had happened even in this instance. When Nandini wanted him to bring
Madhuranthakan from Thanjavur, he accepted. But when he started to travel,
several doubts sprung in his mind. The doubts multiplied and grew in intensity
and after a while he was tormented by his own thoughts. He never doubted
Nandini’s fidelity. But the fact that he had left Nandini in the company of three
able-bodied young men made him restless.

He hated all the three young men – Kandhanmaran, Vandhiya Thevan and
Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan. Long ago when Nandini and Pazhuvettaraiyar
were passing Kandhanmaran in the underground treasury, the latter unwittingly
commented on the good looks of his “daughter”. This was etched in
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s heart as if done with a red hot iron. He was so furious that he
even ordered his personal bodyguard to kill Kandhanmaran. Later he regretted
his hasty decision. Somehow Kandhanmaran survived. He never knew how
Kandhanmaran survived that near fatal attack and how the guard of the treasury
was mysteriously killed. He could not forget the fact that Kandhanmaran stayed
in his own palace and it was his young wife Nandini who nursed him back to
health.

Nandini was now with that dangerous young man Kandhanmaran.

Vandhiya Thevan was also in Kadambur now. He had started hating the
impudent young man the moment he set his eyes on him for the very first time.
When he learnt that he was there in the capital to deliver a warning message to
the Emperor and later escaped from the Fort, he was even more furious. He did
not forget the words of his brother, the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, who had hinted
that Nandini might have helped him to escape from the Fort.

That could never be true, he pacified himself. For Vandhiya Thevan was the
personal messenger of Princess Kunthavai and Prince Arulmozhivarman. That
ruled out any connection between him and Nandini. But when the old warrior
thought of the two together – Nandini and Vandhiya Thevan – Pazhuvettaraiyar’s
strong heart burned in jealousy.

Nandini was now with that young man Vandhiya Thevan.

Prince Adithya Karikalan was also there in Kadambur. Pazhuvettaraiyar had
come to know that the arrogant prince once wanted to marry Nandini The
marriage did not take place for some reason. But why should the Prince meet
Nandini now?

Adithya Karikalan might be a ruffian. He had never been courteous to the elders
in the Government. But he was a Chozha offspring. Nobody born of the Chozha
clan lusted for another man’s wife. Karikalan was blemishless when it came to
women.

But what about Nandini? To what extent could he trust her? Why should he
blindly obey her words? What was the guarantee that Nandini was a woman of
character? Nandini was after all picked up right from the street. Almost literally
so. Pazhuvettaraiyar did not even know her antecedents. He did not care to
know. His brother the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had in many instances, directly
and indirectly, talked about her character, or rather the conspicuous lack of it.

‘Is my brother right? Will Nandini remain faithful to me? I have heard of women
cheating on their lovers and husbands in folktales. Do such women exist in the
real world as well? Is Nandini such a woman?’

These thoughts made him quite furious. He was also consumed by his lust for his
young wife. Pazhuvettaraiyar was in the grip of two of the most powerful human
emotions – anger and lust. His body swayed. He cleared his throat. He was with
his men at that time; and had to watch himself.

He gritted his teeth and swore to himself:

“I’ll know the truth in a day or two. And never will I repeat this mistake in my
life.”

Chapter 9: The River Bank Caved In

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s fellow passengers could never know the storms raging in his
mind. They saw his face and knew that he was highly disturbed. They thought
that he was worried about the external storm; they did not know that a fiercer
storm raged inside his mind.

The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was known for his fearlessness. If such a warrior
was shaken by the storm then it must be really dangerous, thought the other men
on board. They now feared that the boat may sink any time and started looking
for ways of saving themselves.

The boat, after struggling in the river for a long time, reached near the river
bank, about three miles away from their destination. They all let out a sigh of
relief because they were near the land though they were three miles away from
their intended destination.

A large tree on the banks of the river which had been swaying in the wind
suddenly broke and started falling down. The boat men strove hard to row away
from the falling tree. The tree fell a little away from the boat but was floating
towards the boat by the force of water and wind. In spite of the best efforts of the
boat men the mishap could not be averted. The huge tree hit the boat. The boat
turned turtle. Everybody was in water.

The other passengers had been worrying about their safety and thus sort of
prepared for that eventuality. They swam towards the shore. Some clung to the
trees floating on water. Some tried to stay afloat by clinging on to whatever was
available.

But unfortunately Pazhuvettaraiyar was in a different world. He never expected
that the boat would sink. He almost drowned when the boat sank. The force of
the river carried him far away from the others. Water entered his mouth, ears and
nose. Finally when he managed to come up he could not see the boat or any of
his fellow passengers anywhere.

He was alone in the midst of nowhere struggling to stay afloat on a river ravaged
by a sudden storm. The warrior in him took control. He had fought many wars
and had won almost all of them. He now considered the floods as his enemy and
was all set to conquer it in a battle for his life. He looked around. He saw a
wooden log floating nearby. He clung to it. And while remaining close to the log
he started swimming in the direction of the bank. He was fighting against the
force of the storm and running water. When he felt tired he just clung on to the
log and floated along. He reached the bank and tried to climb up to the land. But
he could not get past the quagmire created by the rains. He was about to climb
up; but then he slipped and fell into the water. He then clung on to the wooden
log, and then tried to climb up the bank. His legs were caught in mire and he
slipped down into the river.

This happened many times till he finally he floated near a place full of reeds. He
grabbed a bunch of reeds and somehow managed to set foot on land after a long
struggle.

The place looked like a dark forest. There was no sign of civilisation in the
vicinity. He must have reached the bank near the boat jetty near Thiruvaiyaaru.
He must have come ten miles east. He must have set foot on land somewhere
near the city of Thirukkudanthai (the modern day Kumbakonam). The only
question in his mind was: “Can I reach Thirukkudanthai town by nightfall?”

The storm was in full swing at that time. The sound of the whirling wind was

like that of a hundred thousand ghosts singing and dancing at the same time.
Trees were falling one after the other. The sound of thunder was so frightening
that for a moment he thought that the Universe was exploding within. There was
heavy rainfall.

There must be some old building or a temple nearby. I can spend the night there
and resume my journey tomorrow morning.’

He staggered along the banks of the river that was flowing pretty close to the rim
of the banks. Thanks to the incessant rains, there was water on the bank as well.
The blinding darkness did not help him move about.

The old man did not notice the level of water increasing on the way. At first he
was ankle-deep in water. Then water was soon up to his knees. He hesitated. In a
few seconds water level had reached his thighs. He was shocked. Before he
could plan his next move he was under water face down.

The river bank had caved in at that point. The river was flowing furiously
towards south and he was tossed and turned in the water. He was carried by
water. It was low ground which lay beyond the river bank. The water plunged
him deeper and deeper. When the boat capsized and he was thrown into water he
could manage to stay afloat easily. That was almost impossible now.

The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was drowning fast. He could not see or hear. Nor
could he lift his head or come above water. He was becoming breathless. It
appeared as if some demon was trying to push him into water and holding him
down so that he would suffocate to death.

“Aha! The flash floods is that ruthless demon. Is there any way to escape from
the clutches of this heartless demon? My feet could not rest on the ground till
now. There is nothing to hold on to. I am losing my breath. It appears as if
somebody is twisting my neck. Holy Mother! Durga Parameswari! Devi! Will I
survive?

Nandini! Devil! See what you have done to me. Oh My God! I left you in the
company of three crooks!

I am ashamed! I fell for your looks! I took pity on you and married you! What
happiness did you give me? Nothing! I lost my peace of mind. And now I am
going to die on the breached banks of River Coleroon, unsung and unhonoured.
My body bears sixty four wounds from the great wars I fought for this country.
They are symbols of my valour. If only I had died in a battle field or in the
normal course of life the country would have erected a huge memorial for me.
Now see my fate! Nobody is going to even find my corpse. I am not even going to
get a proper funeral. My body is going to rot here in this godforsaken place. Or
will be stuck in the depths of this river. Nobody will know what happened to me.
Or my body may be tossed aside somewhere on the path of this river. I may
become food to the dogs and jackals. What an ignoble death!”

Pazhuvettaraiyar was overwhelmed by these thoughts and soon became
unconscious.

It was only when his head hit something hard did he regain his consciousness.
His hands were holding on to a hard surface – some stone or hard ground. Some
force pushed him upward. He gathered all his strength and climbed up. The next
second he was on a granite floor. He tried hard to open his eyes. His eyes could
not stand the glare of the blinding light. When his eyes got trained to the bright
light he saw the beautiful face of the Holy Mother, Durga Parameswari.

What a love, Ma! You have saved me! As soon as my earthly life is over you have
taken me directly to your abode! What compassion, Ma!

No, it was not heaven. It was a temple of Goddess Durga. He was in the
mandapam next to the sanctum sanctorum of the temple. A small oil lamp was
glowing inside the temple. And it was the light coming from that lamp that
looked like the blinding light of apocalypse a few seconds earlier.

It was still raining hard outside. The storm had not lost its ferocity. Even that rain
and that storm could not blow off the oil lamp lit near the Goddess.

Is that a good omen for me? Does it signify the Holy Mother’s special love for
me? Even if I am surrounded by dangers I will eventually come out of them all
unscathed. That seems to be the message of the burning lamp. There is nothing
in this world equal to the love of the Holy Mother. My prayers have not been in
vain.

The old man tried to stand erect. His body shivered in cold. He had been in water
for a long time. Pazhuvettaraiyar pulled off the screen in the temple and wiped
himself. He removed his wet clothes and tied the screen cloth around his waist.

He saw some fruits, broken coconuts, sweet meats and other offerings made to
the Holy Mother. The Priest and the devotees must have seen the raging river
and must have run away abandoning those things. Why did they flee the temple?
Because of the storm? Or because the river bank had caved in and the river
started flowing towards the temple?

Whatever might be the cause it’s all my good luck. The Holy Mother has not only

saved me from the jaws of death but has also given some food for me. What love!

Pazhuvettaraiyar decided to spend the night in the temple. There could not be a
better or a safer place. The breached river must be flowing around the temple.
The temple might be in danger. The floods might even be shaking the foundation
of this small structure. The foundation might cave in and the temple would go
under water.

But nothing of that sort can happen tonight. It is too early for that. I am not
going to leave this place. Neither my body nor my mind has any energy to move
even an inch further.

He approached the sanctum sanctorum with a sense of devotion and adoration.
He ate the offerings as much as he could. He also saved something for future. He
lay down before the Goddess as if he were prostrating at Her feet. He was tired.
He lapsed into a sound sleep.

Chapter 10: The Moment of Realisation!

Pazhuvettaraiyar was caught in the river and managed to escape; he was then
trapped in water because the river-bank caved in. It was an ordeal like none he
had experienced before. With great struggle he freed himself from danger. At
the end of it all he was exhausted and slept like a log for many hours. When he
had enough rest memories and dreams appeared.

In one of the dreams Goddess Durga Parameswari stepped off her pedestal and
walked towards him. Her eyes emitted fire:

“You and your clan have always been dear to me. That’s the only reason I have
come to warn you now. The bride you have in your palace, Nandini, is a
poisonous snake in the guise of a woman. Her mission in life is to destroy your
clan and that of the Chozha King. She is waiting for the right time. Remove her
from your palace and from your mind as well. And if you don’t mark my words
your clan will be humiliated and disgraced. There will be no redemption for you.
Don’t tell me that I have not warned you.”

The Goddess resumed her seat.

Pazhuvettaraiyar woke up with a start. His body was shivering. Yes, it was a
dream. But it was as intense as reality.

Another day had dawned. The storm had almost drained. The rains had stopped.
He could hear the sound of running water. He came to the outer hall of the
temple to take stock of the situation. It was quite frightening. The breach on the

river bank had become larger by now. Half of the river was now flowing through
the breach. As far as he could see there was nothing but water in the east and
south. In the West the river was flowing around the temple with tremendous
speed. Further down in the same direction there was a dense forest thick in
foliage.

Pazhuvettaraiyar inferred that it should be the forest adjacent to the place called
Thiruppurambayam, the place where a war memorial had been built for King
Prithvipathi of Kanga country.

He thought about the war that was fought in that place more than a hundred
years ago. He also remembered the heroic deeds of his ancestors. And how they
helped the Chozha clan win that difficult war.

Will Nandini bring disgrace to my illustrious clan? The Holy Mother warned me.
Yes, it was a dream. Or is it a warning? A premonition? Will her words come
true?

Whatever it may be I’ll have to be very careful from now on. I will have to dig
deep into the antecedents of Nandini. But first I will have to leave this
godforsaken place. Let me manage to walk to Thiruppurambayam village and
seek the help of the people living there. If any of my men had survived the
accident they might also probably be in that village seeking help.

But the major hurdle now was to cross the river in floods to reach the village on
the other side.

River Coleroon had breached its boundaries and was now flowing so ferociously

all around the temple. Even an elephant on the rampage might be carried away
by the force of water. How could he, an ordinary old man, dream of crossing the
river?

There was also a greater danger in just waiting for the water to recede. The river
was likely to dig deeper into the foundation of the temple. It was a question of
time before the whole structure came down unless of course Goddess Durga
Parameswari willed otherwise.

What was the way out?

Yes, there was another way. Right before the temple there was a large neem tree.
It had somehow managed to withstand the storm. The breached river was
running around the tree with great force. The water was sure to reach the roots of
the tree and shake it up. In all probability the tree would fall even before the
temple did. And if the tree fell it might serve as a kind of bridge to the forest
which lay to the west of the temple. There was another possibility as well. If the
tree fell the river might take it along and toss it over to the banks somewhere. So
if only Pazhuvettaraiyar managed to get on to the tree as soon as it fell down he
had a fair chance of escaping.

But he had to manage to stay in the temple till that time. There was enough food
for one more day. There was no option other than patiently waiting for the tree to
fall. And then use it either as a bridge or boat to reach to safety.

There is no point in being impatient or hurrying up things. The Goddess –
blessed forever be Her name – wants me to do great things in whatever is left of
my life. That is why she saved me from being washed away in the floods. I am
hopeful that She will show me a way out of this crisis.

The day passed without any event. Another day and another night passed in the
same fashion. The storm continued its dance of destruction while moving
towards the West.

The rains had stopped completely. And yet Pazhuvettaraiyar was still a hostage
in the temple. The water flow in the river had come down. But the water flow
around the temple had not. The water level around the temple must be
increasing, thought Pazhuvettaraiyar. But there was no way to measure it.
Swimming across the water was out of question.

Finally on the third day when the sun was about to set the large neem tree fell
down as Pazhuvettaraiyar had expected. The other end of the fallen tree touched
the western banks of the river and thus served as a perfect bridge to reach across.
Pazhuvettaraiyar got ready to go.

At first he hesitated; he would reach the forest in the night. And it would be very
difficult to find his way in the forest in darkness. But that was any day better
than being trapped inside the temple.

He approached the shrine of the Goddess and prostrated before Her to express
his gratitude.

He heard a strange voice that sent chills through his spine. At first he thought
that the Goddess was directly talking to him. Then he found out that the voice
came from a little distance away from the temple.

“SORCERER! SORCERER!” The voice called.

“RAVIDASA! RAVIDASA!” The voice called again. Pazhuvettaraiyar vaguely
remembered hearing that voice.

He stood up and walked to the Mandapam near the entrance. He hid behind a
pillar and looked in the direction of the voice. He saw a figure near the top
branch of the fallen tree on the banks of the river.

“SORCERER! SORCERER!” The voice called again. The voice reminded him
of what his brother had told him some time ago.

He might perhaps come to know some dangerous secrets, all thanks to the grace
of the Goddess. Pazhuvettaraiyar stood still.

He saw the figure on the other side of the river walking on the fallen tree
towards the temple. He did something which he had never done before. He lay
down on the temple floor and pretended to sleep.

He now had a burning desire to know more about Ravidasan, the Sorcerer. He
must be the one who frequented his palace to see Nandini. What was the
relationship between him and Nandini? Who was looking out for Ravidasan in
this godforsaken place near the forest? If he knew the answers to these questions
he could find out whether his young wife Nandini was cheating on him. And
what she was up to these days.

If I ever get hold of that Sorcerer I won’t leave him till I extract a full confession
from him.

The man came near Pazhuvettaraiyar who still pretended to sleep.

“Ravidasa! Ravidasa! Where are you?” – the man called.

‘Oh My God!’ – Pazhuvettaraiyar almost shouted.

‘This voice belongs to that man who performed the Velanattam dance and
predicted the future of the Royal family. Yes, it is that Devaralan. Can I squeeze
his neck and make him spill out the beans? No, let me not act in haste. Let me
wait. My mission is to trap Ravidasan through this man.’

“What is this Sorcerer? You’ve gone to bed even before sunset! Or are you
dead?”

The person came near Pazhuvettaraiyar and turned him to see his face. Even then
Pazhuvettaraiyar did not move.

It was late in the evening. Light was fading fast. Devaralan – yes he was the onesaw the face of the sleeping man. He rubbed his eyes and saw the face again. His
feelings of surprise, shock and fear came out as meaningless sounds. He was
howling as he ran away from the place as fast as his legs could carry him.

Before Pazhuvettaraiyar could open his eyes and sit up he crossed the
Mandapam in front of the temple and jumped over the make-shift Neem tree
bridge and reached the other bank in no time. The next moment he disappeared
into the dense forest.

Pazhuvettaraiyar was at first amused. As soon as he saw the man disappear into
the bushes he regretted his decision of just letting him go. He stood up and
started to run. He could not jump over the branches of the fallen tree as swiftly
as Devaralan did. He staggered, had to get hold of the branches before he could
cross the river in spate.

He reached the other bank of the river. A small pathway in which only one
person could walk at a time led to the forest. The wet soil had fresh footprints.
So he inferred that Devaralan must have gone that way and started walking fast.

The moon had not come out. The sky was overcast. The place was enveloped in
eerie darkness. Strange noises were heard. The animals, reptiles and birds had
been put to extreme hardship because of heavy rain. They were relieved to know
that the rains had stopped completely. They were expressing their relief and
happiness in their own language. They were also moving around in the forest.

The small pathway ended abruptly. But Pazhuvettaraiyar did not stop. He was
determined to find Devaralan and Ravidasan even if that required his staying
awake for the whole night.

He waded through the thick bushes. After wandering pointlessly in the forest for
more than an hour he saw some light at a distance. The light was not still; it was
slowly moving. It must be a flaming torch which somebody was carrying to
illuminate the way.

Pazhuvettaraiyar started walking fast towards that moving light. Soon he was
very close to the light. The flaming torch illuminated a ruined building and then
disappeared inside. Pazhuvettaraiyar immediately knew that the building was
the war memorial erected in honour of King Prithveepathi in the village of
Thiruppurambayam. He went near one of the walls and was trying to make sense
of the sounds coming from inside.

He was not disappointed.

Two men were talking. They were quite loud and Pazhuvettaraiyar could hear
every word they spoke.

“Sorcerer, do you know how long I have been looking for you? I was afraid that
you might not come. I even thought that the Death God has taken you to his
abode.”

It was Devaralan.

The Sorcerer Ravidasan laughed.

“Why should the Death God come to me? He is aiming for the King – Emperor
Sundara Chozhan and his two sons. By tomorrow all the three will be dead.”

There was a flash of lightning. The whole place was bathed in bright light for a
few seconds.

Chapter 11: The Mandapam Collapsed!

Pazhuvettaraiyar could recognise the two men thanks to the flash of lightning.
He had seen one of them, Ravidasan, in his palace a couple of times. Nandini
had told him that he was an acclaimed expert in sorcery and black magic.

His brother, Kalaanthaka Kandan, the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had cautioned him
about that man.

The other man was Devaralan – the one who performed Velanattam in
Kadambur Palace. But did he really see him for the first time in Kadambur? Did
he not see him earlier? Perhaps yes, or perhaps not. Oh My God! He now
vaguely remembered. Was he not Parameswaran, the one he had fired from
Government service long ago?

He was now keen on eavesdropping on their conversation.

“The day has come. Death is looming large for a few members of the Royal
family. You have been repeating these statements for a long time. The Lord of
Death has taken the lives of many people, young and old, in the recent past. But
he is still afraid to come near Sundara Chozhan, who has been bedridden for the
past three years. And the Death Lord is even more scared of claiming the lives of
his two sons. You know very well how many times we tried to kill the Emperor’s
son in Srilanka. “

“Don’t worry, friend. The Lord of Death is more intelligent than us. He has been
waiting so along only to claim the lives of all the three on the same day. Mark

my words: that day is tomorrow. Thank God you are here. You are the right
person to act as the messenger of the Death-Lord. But tell me why are you
shaking in fear? Were you caught in the floods at the Coleroon River? I am sure
you still have the boat with you.”

“Yes, I do. But I had to struggle a lot to save the boat from the storm and floods.
I have been looking for you for quite some time. What happened to you? Where
were you?”

““

“You want to know why I am shaking in fear. That’s because I saw the Lord of
Death face to face a little while ago. No, no. I saw Death’s elder brother. I am
terribly scared.”

“What the hell are you saying, Parameswara? This Lord of Death is just a figure
of speech. And you are talking as if it is a real being and it has an elder brother
too. Even if the Death-Lord were a real entity why should you fear? He should
be afraid of you.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar was shocked to see the other man being addressed as
Parameswaran. His suspicion turned out to be true now.

Pazhuvettaraiyar also noticed that he was mentioned as the elder brother of the
Lord of Death by Parameswaran. He wanted to wring his neck and kill him with
his own hands. He controlled himself because he wanted to know what they
were up to. They had not yet broached the subject of Nandini. But why did the
Sorcerer say that Death was about to visit all the men in the Emperor’s family?

Was it an astrological prediction? Was this man so capable? Then whatever
Nandini said about him must be true. If the Emperor and his two sons died the
very next day....

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s mission would be accomplished without any bloodshed.
There would be no need to divide the mighty Chozha Empire.

But wait. Why should Parameswaran, an ordinary employee dismissed from His
Majesty’s service, be worried about that?

Oh My God! Pazhuvettaraiyar now remembered. Twenty years ago when he fired
that man from Government service he had vowed “I am going to destroy the
entire Chozha clan.”

And yes, he is going to talk about me. I am eager to know.

Parameswaran continued:

“As per your instructions I came here only this morning. But I did not see you
anywhere. I thought you must have been washed away in the floods. I looked for
you all over the place. There is a small temple near the place where the river
breached the banks. I saw somebody lying there. I thought it must be you. I went
near the person and saw his face. Can you guess what I saw there? Yes, it was
none other than the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

The Sorcerer laughed aloud. The birds screeched. The owls hooted.

“Did you see that old bandicoot, Pazhuvettaraiyar or his ghost?”

“No it was not a ghost. I touched the man and turned him. I saw the face,
Ravidasa. Can the Death Lord have two elder brothers? The same face, the same
moustache the same scars!”

“Ok. I am convinced you saw the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Last evening he was
attempting to cross the Coleroon River in a boat. When the boat was near the
bank it capsized because of the strong wind. Some of his men who survived the
accident are still looking for him near the river bank. They even suspect that he
might have drowned. They went up to the place where the river breached. I was
behind them when they returned and overheard their conversation. Yes, you saw
him. Or perhaps you saw his corpse.”

“No, no He was alive. If he had been dead his eye balls would not have been
visible. I turned him over. His eyes were closed. He was in a deep sleep.”

“Idiot! What did you do? Did you just leave him alone? You should have killed
him. You could have thrown a large stone on him and finished him off.”

“You don’t know anything about Pazhuvettaraiyar’s head. If I throw a stone on it
the stone would break, not his head.”’

“At least you could have dragged him and thrown him in the river. You missed a

golden opportunity. You idiot!”

“Didn’t you hear me? When I saw him I felt like seeing Death itself. Or probably
the elder brother of the Death Lord. Even when I danced before him at the
Kadambur palace my heart was in my mouth. If only he recognised me.... Oh
My God... “

“But why are you trembling even now?”

“I’ll be trembling so long as he is alive. I should have dragged him into the river.
I regret my lapse. I feel bad about it.”

“Don’t worry, my friend. In a way it is better for us if he is alive. Sundara
Chozhan and his sons are going to die soon. The Chieftains of the Kingdom will
be on two sides and fight with each other. Pazhuvettaraiyars and Sambuvaraiyars
will be on one side while Kodumbalur Chieftain and Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman
will be on the other. That would be a terrible fight. And that would help us
accomplish our mission. We can use the time to gather our army and consolidate
our position in Pandya Kingdom.”

“That’s all fantasy, Ravidasa. For that infighting to happen the Emperor and his
two sons should be killed tomorrow. What’s the guarantee that all the three will
die tomorrow? You know something?”

“What?”

“Prince Arulmozhivarman is very much alive. He is in Nagapattinam. He was
surrounded by the people of the coastal town. They want him to become the
Emperor.”

Ravidasan’s laugh was sarcastic.

“Do I know? I was the one who made it happen. Who do you think forced out
the Prince from the monastery? It’s our Revadasa Kramavithan’s daughter,
Rakkammal. She is now married to that boat man, Murugaiyyan.”

“So what? What do we gain by Arulmozhivarman coming out of his hiding?
Now he will be surrounded by thousands of people. Even where there were just
two or three men with him we could not kill him. What the hell can we do now?”

“Patience, my friend, Patience. Even this is for our good. The Lord of Death will
visit all the three on the same day.”

“Ravidasa, how can Death come near the Prince when he is with thousands of
people?”

“He will, my friend, he surely will. The Lord of Death might be sitting on the tip
of an elephant goad. And at the right time he will claim the life of the Prince.
Parameswara, people will insist that the Prince travel on an elephant to the
capital city. A large procession will follow him. The mahout’s life might be
threatened on the way. And our man, Rakkammal’s father Revadasa
Kramavithan, will take the mahout’s place. Just imagine what could happen
when our man is in the driver’s seat, sitting close to the victim, I mean the
Prince.”

“Ravidasa, I agree that your intelligence is matchless. We can be confident that
Kramavithan will carry out the murderous assignment. Now who is going to take
care of Sundara Chozhan? What have you planned for him?”

“I have left Soman Sambavan at the underground treasury of Pazhuvettaraiyar.
He is armed with a spear. There is a secret passage from the treasury to Sundara
Chozhan’s Palace. I led him through that passage and have even showed him the
place where Sundara Chozhan usually sleeps. Even a blind man could kill the
Emperor from there. He has to simply throw the spear at him. I have however
asked Soman Sambavan to wait till tomorrow morning.”

“What for? Is it not prudent to finish him off when he has the chance? Why
should he wait?”

“Fool! If the Emperor is killed first then his sons would become more careful.
We won’t gain anything by the death of that sick, old man.

Let that wait. What is the news on your side? How are our people at the
Kadambur Palace? What is going to happen in Kadambur tomorrow is the most
important of all.”

“Kadambur is in a festive mood. Marriage proposals and love dramas are being
enacted very well. But I am not happy with your totally trusting the Junior
Queen of Pazhuvur, Nandini.”

“Is she the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur? Have you forgotten the fact that the slain

Pandya King Veerapandiyan married her two days before his death? She is now
our Queen, the Queen of Pandyas, Pandimadevi. And have you forgotten the fact
that she has taken a vow to avenge the death of the Pandya King? A week ago
she got the Royal sword of the Pandya Kingdom from the Pandya Prince at this
very place. Have you forgotten that too?”

“I have not. But you should have seen the pleasure trip your Pandimadevi had in
the Veera Narayana Lake yesterday.”

“She has to be like that. There is no other way. She is an expert in hiding her real
intentions. Otherwise how could she have managed to stay in Pazhuvettaraiyar’s
Palace for three years? And how could she have helped us while putting on a
show of being the faithful wife of Pazhuvettaraiyar? You said that you saw
Pazhuvettaraiyar at the Durga Temple. I too heard that his boat met with an
accident. Now I want to know when did Pazhuvettaraiyar leave Kadambur and
why?”

“I am not sure. But I heard from the grapevine that he left Kadambur to fetch
Madhuranthakan. He left Kadambur yesterday morning. After he left the Princes
went out for hunting. The Princesses went out to the Veeranarayana Lake for
some water sports. If you had seen the Princes and the Princesses returning
happily from the trip you would not be so trustful of Nandini.”

“Don’t ever doubt her. It should be her plan to remove Pazhuvettaraiyar from the
scene. She is a good strategist.”

“Nobody knows what is in a woman’s mind. She could have sent the old man so
that she could take revenge for Pandyan’s death. Or for indulging in games of
love with young and able Princes.”

“What is this pointless babble? Nandini forgot her love long back. She now hates
Karikalan and is ready to kill him anytime.”

“No, I didn’t mean Karikalan. I mean his friend and messenger, Vandhiya
Thevan. Do you remember that Nandini let him go two or three times when she
could have easily had him killed?”

Ravidasan, the Sorcerer, laughed.

“Why did she let Vandhiya Thevan live? You will know the reason quite soon.
And when you do you will be surprised. Many people will be surprised,
especially the Emperor’s darling daughter Kunthavai. When Kunthavai knows
that her beloved, Vandhiya Thevan, killed her own brother Karikalan, won’t she
be surprised? She will be shocked.”

“What the hell are you saying Ravidasa? Do you mean to say that Vandhiya
Thevan is going to kill Adithya Karikalan? Has he become one among us?”

“Don’t ask too many questions. Why should you bother about the hand that kills
Karikalan, so long that hand holds the sword with the picture of fish, the insignia
of Pandyas? The blame will be on Vandhiya Thevan. Now tell me what you
think of our Queen’s intelligence.”

“I will hold my judgment in abeyance till the mission is accomplished.”

“I am very sure that Karikalan is going to die before tomorrow night. That’s
Nandini’s responsibility. And she will fulfil it at any cost. And now it’s our turn
to fulfil ours.”

“What?”

“We should be ready at the entrance of the secret passage that goes out of the
Kadambur Palace. Nandini will come out of the palace through the passage. We
should take her with us to the Kolli Hills. We will watch the scene unfolding in
the Chozha Kingdom from that vantage point. And if possible...”

“If possible... .... “

“We should take away our gold hidden at the underground Treasury of
Pazhuvettaraiyar. Will it not be a sweet revenge to use the Chozha gold to wage
a war against Chozhas and destroy them?”

Ravidasan laughed again.

Parameswaran, acting as Devaralan, was sceptical.

“Don’t build castles in the air. Let us first cross this river and reach the other
bank and then go to Kadambur. Let’s see whether things happen in Kadambur as
you predicted. Then we will think of a suitable plan to rob Pazhuvettaraiyar’s
hidden treasures. Shall we start now? Should we not cross the river before it gets
dark?”

“No, no. Let’s wait. Enough if we get into the boat early in the morning. By that
time the river will be calm and the winds may not be this strong.”

“Then shall we spend the night here in this War Memorial?”

Ravidasan thought for a while. He heard the jackals howling. His body shivered
in fear.

“Ravidasa, it’s quite amusing. Why are you afraid of jackals?”

“If you have ever been caught in Kodikkarai quicksand and buried up to your
neck and if you were surrounded by a hundred jackals ready to eat you, you
won’t talk like this. I don’t fear the roar of a lion or the bleat of an elephant. But
when I hear jackals howling I tremble in fear. Let’s not stay here for the night.
Let’s find a safer place in a village, near a temple or an inn. You talked about the
Durga Temple, right? Let’s go there first. If Pazhuvettaraiyar is still there let’s
drag him into the river and let him die there. We will only be helping him by
killing him now. For if he is alive till day after tomorrow, the agony he might
experience will be far worse than death.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar heard every word they spoke. The words fell on his ears as if
they were molten lead. His heart was like a volcano on the verge of eruption.
When he came to know that his lady love, the beautiful young lady he had
married, was really a Pandya Queen and that she had come into his life only to
take revenge on the Chozha clan and that for the past three years she had been
deceiving him, he was devastated. He felt insulted and betrayed.

Pazhuvettaraiyar then thought of the connection between his clan and that of the
Chozhas which extended up to six generations.

Who was Sundara Chozhan after all? Who were his sons? Sundara Chozhan’s
grandmother was from the Pazhuvur clan. And all his anger over the Emperor’s
sons was of a recent origin. For the only reason that Adithya Karikalan was rude
to him and that Malaiyaman was against him, he had unwittingly paved the way
for a dangerous conspiracy to overthrow the Chozha clan.

‘See what I have done. I have let the avowed enemies of Chozhas, the Pandyas,
to steal the Chozha treasures under my very nose. And they are now planning to
use Chozhas’ gold to destroy Chozhas. What an irony! What foolishness!

Oh My God! Will the Emperor and his two sons be killed tomorrow in three
different locations? I will never let that happen so long as I am alive. I have a
full twenty four hours before me. I can do so many things within that time. Let
me go to Kudanthai Town tonight and from there send messages to Thanjavur
and Nagapattinam. Then I will rush to Kadambur. I should reach Kadambur
before these devils do.”

Should I let them go to Kadambur? Why not I finish them here in this place? I
am not armed. So what. My arms are mightier than a sword or spear. Perhaps
they might be hiding small knives in their waists. But I should not let them take
those knives out. I will wring their necks and kill them.

But is it wise to fight with them now? I have got all the information I wanted. It
was because of the grace of the Holy Mother, Durga Parameswari, that my boat
sank in the river and I came to know of this deadly conspiracy. My first duty is to
save the lives of the Emperor and his two sons. More than the other two I should
make sure nothing happens to Adithya Karikalan at the Kadambur Palace. If he

is killed as planned by these devils then that would be a blot on the otherwise
blemishless history of Pazhuvettaraiyars. My clan, my future generations will be
disgraced.

Whatever the Pazhuvettaraiyars did for the Chozha clan for the last six
generations will be easily forgotten. And if Karikalan is killed by that demoness
Nandini,masquerading as his wife then there could not be a greater insult to his
family.

Oh My God! Can such a beautiful form hold so much of poison? Can her smile
which can bewitch all the three worlds so cunningly conceal her murderous
plans? Are these people speaking the truth?

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s heart was on fire. In the midst of all these new developments
there was some consolation too. Nandini might be a dangerous conspirator. Yes,
she might have pretended to love him and might have deceived him. But she did
not lust after Karikalan or Vandhiya Thevan. She considered those handsome
princes only as adolescent boys and was using them for her murderous mission.
She was friendly with them not because she wanted their company but because
they were mere pawns in the great game of political chess played by her.

Now the assassination of Karikalan had to be prevented for totally different
reasons. It was not to protect the honour of his clan. But also to save Nandini
from the heinous sin. Perhaps Pazhuvettaraiyar could even change her mind.
Nandini was in the net of these conspirators. She might be a puppet in their
hands. If he could kill these two men here that might set Nandini free.

With these thoughts raging in his mind, Pazhuvettaraiyar cleared his throat
loudly. It was like a lion’s roar. The conspirators were shocked.

“Who are you?” Devaralan shouted.

Pazhuvettaraiyar could not be in hiding any longer. He came out.

The conspirators were shocked to see the tall figure standing before them in the
backdrop of the dark, rainy night.

“I happen to be the elder brother of the Death Lord.” Pazhuvettaraiyar laughed at
his own joke. The sound of his laugh made the whole region tremble. It was
more of a war cry than a mere laugh.

As soon as the two conspirators recognised Pazhuvettaraiyar they tried to run
away. But Pazhuvettaraiyar did not let them go. He extended his long hands to
stop them. His right hand was firmly on the shoulder of Ravidasan while his left
was on that of Devaralan. For a moment it appeared that the two men were quite
overwhelmed by the sudden appearance of the old man and that they would be
killed by him.

Pazhuvettaraiyar thought fast. Yes, he was more powerful than either of them.
Even then he could not manage two men in their prime age simultaneously. He
pushed Devaralan down and placed a foot firmly on his back. Meanwhile he
started to wring the neck of Ravidasan.

Devaralan was fighting for life. He pulled a knife from his waist and tried to stab
the foot that was keeping him down. Pazhuvettaraiyar knew his intentions; he
used the other leg to deliver a strong blow to the wrist that was holding the knife.

The knife fell down at a place beyond his reach. And his hand became almost
lifeless. At that time Pazhuvettaraiyar’s leg loosened a bit. Devaralan squiggled
under his leg and got himself free. And with his other hand he rained blows on
the old man. Devaralan was stunned; it seemed as if he was hitting a wall of
stone. His hand hurt and he was afraid that he might soon lose action on that
hand too.

Meanwhile Ravidasan was trying to remove Pazhuvettaraiyar’s hand from his
neck. All his efforts failed. The old man had an iron grip on his neck which did
not slacken a bit. Ravidasan’s eye balls were popping out and he was gasping for
breath. If the old man continued to hold his neck for few more seconds then he
would die of suffocation. He thought fast and gurgled

“Devarala, climb up on the temple. And pull down the roof. Come on. Fast.”

Devaralan sprang on to the roof of the Memorial. A part of the roof had already
given away and was about to fall at the slightest exertion of pressure. The two
men who knew that now used it for their survival. Devaralan used all his might
to push the roof down. A tree growing on the top of the roof also came down
along with the roof.

Pazhuvettaraiyar saw the roof giving way and knew that it would fall on him
anytime. He took off his hand from Ravidasan’s neck and tried to shield himself
from the falling structure. Ravidasan used that small gap to wiggle away from
his grip. The roof and the tree fell on Pazhuvettaraiyar’s head. He became
unconscious.

Chapter 12: The Comet Disappeared

Pazhuvettaraiyar came back to his senses after a long time. He found himself in
the middle of a battle field. He could clearly hear the clanging sound of swords.
War drums were celebrating the victory of some king. A thousand voices joined
in the victory cries.

“Hail the Pandya King! Fie On His Enemies!”

On the other side a different voice was heard.

“RUN! RUN FOR YOUR LIFE FOR THE KANGA KING HAS FALLEN!”

Some tried to stop those who were fleeing from the battle field.

Suddenly the noisy battlefield was enveloped in a cloud of silence.
Pazhuvettaraiyar looked around. A tall and hefty warrior was carrying King
Vijayaalaya Chozha on his shoulders. The Chozha King had lost both his legs;
he held two giant sized swords in his hands.

His battle cries shook the earth.

“Chozha Warriors! Do not run! Everyone is going to die. We are all going to die

anyway. Death may come now or later. Let’s not think of death; let’s not be
frightened of death. Let’s live in honour and die saving the honour of our
country. For those whom honour is more important than life follow me. Let us
annihilate the enemies. The rest can run away from the battle field like
cowards.”

The Chozha and the Pallava soldiers running for their lives stopped on their
tracks. They saw Vijayaalaya Chozhan. They saw a man who did not have legs
wielding large swords. They saw a warrior quite unfazed by the mighty enemy.
All traces of fear left their bodies. They turned around and with earth-shattering
cries started advancing towards the enemy.

Pazhuvettaraiyar saw the man who was responsible for turning the tables almost
at the nick of time. He saw the soldier who was carrying Vijayaalaya Chozhan
on his shoulders. Wonder of wonders! Pazhuvettaraiyar was the one who was
bearing the Chozha Lion, Vijayaalaya Chozhan on his mighty shoulders.

Pazhuvettaraiyar was holding the Chozha King with one of his hands and was
wielding a sword on the other. He entered the enemy lines in that posture.
Wherever the duo entered the heads of Pandya soldiers fell down by the dozens.

The situation changed. The war now turned favourable for the Chozhas. The
Pandyan soldiers ran away for their lives. Victory drums were heard in all the
directions. Vijayaalaya Chozhan was now seated before the Pallava King.
Pazhuvettaraiyar was standing by his side.

The Pallava King spoke to the Chozha King in a reverential voice.

“The Best of Warriors! It is because of your sheer valour and intelligence that
our defeat was turned into victory. From now on the Chozha country will be
independent. You and your valiant son Adithya may rule over the Chozha
Kingdom as independent rulers not subject to any other power.”

Vijayaalaya Chozha remembered the immense support he got from
Pazhuvettaraiyar. In a way Pazhuvettaraiyar was a related to the Chozhas by
marriage.

“It is only because of you that we won this war. From now on you will be the
Commander of the Chozha Army as well as the Chancellor of Exchequer of the
Chozha Kingdom. I am appointing you to the powerful post right now. And after
your time your descendants shall continue to hold the post so long as they are
true to the Chozha clan.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s face, full of wounds, blossomed into a proud smile.

Suddenly Pazhuvettaraiyar became furious. He saw his lineal descendant, the
now Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar, and burst out.

“Traitor! Betrayer! Evil Man! You are a disgrace to my clan! You destroyed the
honour and the glory we gathered for more than six generations in no time. You
insulted your ancestors. You betrayed your friendship. You betrayed your
country. You betrayed your employer. You harboured the worst enemies of our
Chozha Empire in your house. You gave them money from the Chozha treasury.
And it is only because of you that the Chozha Kingdom is going to be destroyed.
And that disgrace will stick to this clan till the end of time.”

Tears were streaming down his eyes as he was heaping curse upon curse on his
own descendant. Then many other Pazhuvettaraiyars, the ancestors of the present
Pazhuvettaraiyar, came in quick succession. They all listed their own heroic
deeds and cursed their unworthy descendant. Then all his ancestors joined to
curse him in chorus.

“You are the very embodiment of evil! You are guilty of the grave offence of
sedition. You betrayed the Chozha clan. We gave our life and soul to reach this
exalted state. And you destroyed the glory of our clan by your lust and
foolishness. What made you lose your mind?”

The Pazhuvettaraiyars disappeared. Kodumbalur Velars and Thirukkovilur
Malaiyamans came in large numbers and surrounded the present
Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“Are you a human being or what? You were never tired of boasting your lineage
– that you and your ancestors were the ones who supported the Chozha Kings,
and at times even literally bore them on your bodies. What happened to that?
You have now caused the downfall of the entire Chozha Empire. You have
become the killer disease for your own country. You evil-man! What happened
to your honour and glory?”

They ridiculed him.

The Chozha people who were behind those Chieftains threw stones and sand on
Pazhuvettaraiyar. Sundara Chozhan, was trying to wade through the crowd, and
was struggling to walk with his weak legs. He looked at the Chieftains who
surrounded Pazhuvettaraiyar. His eyes emitted fire. He roared at the Chieftains –
the Velars and the Malaiyamans:

“Fie on you! What the hell are you doing? Why do you insult him? Why do you
throw stones at him? Why the hell are you branding him as a traitor? Even if I
and my family were to perish because of this man’s treachery, I don’t care. But
don’t ever insult him. Or even accuse him. Pazhuvettaraiyar! Chancellor! Come,
let’s go to the Palace.”

The people who surrounded him dispersed.

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s brother, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, also known as Kaalanthaka
Kandar, came before him.

“Anna! See the kind of trust our Emperor has on us! How can you ever think of
betraying him? How can you keep that witch, that poisonous snake, Nandini in
our palace after knowing that her only mission in life is to destroy the Chozha
clan?”

Then the Junior also disappeared.

Then the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was surrounded by Vandhiya Thevan,
Kandhan Maran and other men of their age-group.

“Hey Old Man! Your hair has gone grey but not your lust! You have been
destroyed by lust. You always boast of the sixty four war-wounds in your body.
What do those wounds say now? Are they marks of valour or the wages for your
betrayal?” The young men laughed in chorus.

Pazhuvettaraiyar was so furious that he wanted to kill them all. He attempted to
unsheathe his sword. But his sword was not to be found.

Princess Kunthavai came in at this time. She signalled to the young men to stop
laughing. And then she spoke to Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“Patta, please ignore the words of these young men. You just have to do one
thing. Drive out that poisonous reptile – I mean Nandini - from your Palace. You
will be fine, Patta.”

The young men vanished from the scene. Then the womenfolk of the
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s family gathered around him. There were a few to start with.
And then there were tens, hundreds and thousands of women spread across more
than six generations of Pazhuvettaraiyars.

“Oh My God! We never thought we would see you like this! Our clan is famous
for its valour. And you have brought disgrace to our clan. We the womenfolk of
this great family sent our husbands, sons, fathers and brothers to the battlefield
for the sake of the Chozha country. They shed blood, fought heroically and
brought glory to our clan. And you destroyed the honour and the glory of the
entire clan in no time.”

The womenfolk sobbed.

“Ladies! Please retire to your chambers. I will never bring disgrace to our clan.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar struggled to speak. The womenfolk did not respond; instead
they pointed out to something at a distance. The Lord of Death was coming
towards Pazhuvettaraiyar. The Lord was mounted on his usual vehicle, the
buffalo. He had a spear and a rope in his hands. The Lord of Death came near
Pazhuvettaraiyar and spoke to him:

“How am I going to thank you, Pazhuvettaraiyar? You helped me take the lives
of the Emperor and his two sons on the same day. 'Thanks' is not the word, my
son.

“NO. NO. NO. I NEVER HELPED YOU. NOR WILL I EVER HELP YOU.
NOT EVEN IN MY WILDEST DREAMS. ON THE OTHER HAND I WILL
BLOCK, YOU. LORD OF DEATH. STOP. STOP HERE. RIGHT NOW.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar screamed. He wanted to stop Death from going on its way. But
something was pressing hard on him. He could not move from his place.

“See! Whatever we said has become true!” The womenfolk of his family cried
again. Some of them cried as if they were at a funeral. The sound of their
lamentations increased with every passing second. Pazhuvettaraiyar could not
bear the sound. He tried to talk. But his words were submerged in their
lamentations. He tried to muffle his ears with his hands. But he could not lift his
hands. There was no life in them.

With great effort he moved his hands. And in that precise moment his eye lids
opened. He returned to the world of reality. It was only then did he know that
whatever he experienced till them was either a vivid dream or a hallucination.
But he could still hear the lamentations. He shuddered. He listened intently. Then

he found out that what he heard was not the lamentations of his womenfolk but
the howling sound of foxes.

He vaguely remembered the conversation he heard before he became
unconscious.

“The old man is dead,” said a voice.

“Look carefully. The old man will not give up so easily. Even the Lord of Death
will be a little afraid to come near the old man,” responded another voice.

“The Lord of Death might be afraid but not the foxes of this forest. Even if there
is a little life left in him the foxes will take care of that. At dawn tomorrow
Pazhuvettaraiyar, the Chancellor of Chozha Kingdom will be nothing but a heap
of bones.”

“Thank God, you pushed down the roof at the right time. Otherwise I would
have been dead by now. He would have killed me.”

“Let’s see whether we can move the roof that has fallen on him.”

“We can’t. We have used a part of our enemy’s memorial building to raise a
memorial for another enemy. “Sorcerer Ravidasan laughed.

“Enough of your laughing. Come let’s get out of this place before our boat is

washed away by the river. Then it will be impossible to get across River
Coleroon.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar remembered these words and examined his present condition.
A part of the roof was on him. It was pressing him hard; and yet he was able to
breathe. How?

A small tree had fallen along with the roof. The tree had fallen on his shoulders
and the roof had fallen on the tree. It was the tree that had saved his life. If the
roof had fallen directly on him his head and chest would have been smashed.
The old man was surprised of his own strength. Even after bearing so much of
weight for such a long time he was still alive. But could he continue to live with
the weight still on him?

Yes, I will have to survive. I will have to live. I have a holy duty to save the
Chozha clan. And if I fail in my mission it will be a disgrace to the entire clan of
Pazhuvettaraiyars. I won’t let that happen. Even if I die and go to the other
world my ancestors living there will curse me. So I should do something to free
myself from this pressing weight and then get away from here as fast as possible.
Oh My God! I don’t know how long I have been lying here. Perhaps the
calamities I want to avert might have already happened. Oh My God.

Meanwhile he heard the foxes howling at very close quarters. He even heard the
sound of the canines breathing near his face. Even these foxes are making fun of
me, thought the old warrior. Let me see how much strength is still left in me. Let
me show the foxes who I am. He gathered all his strength and tried to lift the tree
that was resting on his shoulders. The tree started to yield. As he pushed the tree,
the roof that was resting on the tree started to move and slip away from him.
Meanwhile the strange sounds made by him kept the foxes at a safe distance.

In what appeared as an aeon to him, but what in reality was not more than a few
minutes, the tree and the roof that were pressing on him were pushed aside
giving him the much needed freedom to move and breathe freely.
Pazhuvettaraiyar, exhausted by his efforts, lay still for a few more minutes. Then
he let out many long sighs. He looked at the sky. He was in the open air. Many
of the trees nearby had fallen down. The sky was very clear. The black clouds
had moved away. The sky was cluttered with many shining stars which glowed
like little pieces of diamonds. Clouds not very dense hid those stars for a few
seconds and then moved away.

A strange star in the Northern skies attracted his attention.

Oh My God! Is this not the comet that appeared with a long tail only a few days
ago? How come its tail has shrunk so much? At the tip of a star there is a foot
long white smoky matter. Even ten days ago the tail of this comet occupied a full
corner of the sky. What is the reason behind the sudden shrinking of the comet’s
tail?

Pazhuvettaraiyar took his eyes off the sky and looked around. The foxes were
still there. There were ten, no twenty, no, not less than fifty foxes. Their eyes
were glowing like flames. They were probably waiting for the old man to die so
that they could devour him. At least the foxes showed that minimal respect to a
Pazhuvettaraiyar, thought the old man.

All of a sudden the skies, the earth and the entire forest region were bathed in a
glow of light. The light was so bright that it hurt the old man’s eyes. No, that was
not a lightning. What else could that be?

Pazhuvettaraiyar looked at the sky once again. What a sight it was! An object
which resembled a brightly burning torch was gliding across the sky. It was so

bright that it hurt his eyes. He closed his eyes and opened them again. The
celestial torch had gone smaller. Its light was fading very fast. And then it
vanished. The place was enveloped in darkness once again.

What could have caused this astronomical miracle? He looked at the sky once
again. He looked at the comet. It was not there. Yes, the comet had fallen down.
There was a grand show of lights on the skies.

A comet falling down was a powerful astrological omen. Something terrible was
going to happen. A catastrophe was going to hit the world. The members of the
Royal Household might be at risk. Disappearance of a comet was followed by
the death of a King. That was a belief held by the people for ages. There could
not be a better time to test the veracity of this belief. It would be known
tomorrow. Why tomorrow, today itself. For Pazhuvettaraiyar could see light in
the Eastern skies. Another day had dawned.

Before the end of that day – that had just dawned – three terrible incidents will
happen in three different places. And I am the only one who knows about all the
three. I am the only person who has the power to prevent them. And if I succeed
in doing it I might have even belied the age-old belief that a falling comet always
portended disaster. But what if I can’t?

Pazhuvettaraiyar shuddered. He could not even think on those lines. He would
give his life and soul to avert the impending doom. He now had an urgent
mission to save the three members of the Chozha Royal Family – the reigning
Emperor Sundara Chozhan and his two sons, Adithya Karikalan and
Arulmozhivarman.

But my first and foremost duty is to save the life of Prince Adithya Karikalan.
And if he is assassinated the blame will fall squarely on me. I should cross River

Coleroon and rush to Kadambur palace to save the Crown Prince. Before that I
should go to Kudanthai and send warning messages to Thanjavur and
Nagappattinam. Having done that I can leave the rest to destiny. This is the most
I can do under the circumstances.

Pazhuvettaraiyar tried to stand up. His body hurt. The tree had fallen on his chest
and that hurt a lot. He also suspected that a bone in one of his legs might have
fractured. He realised that though he was alive he was hurt in several places.

The old warrior ignored his pain. At first he could not stand up. He gritted his
teeth and used all his might to rise. He stood up. He looked around. The foxes
had run away. Perhaps they were frightened by the sudden flash of light when
the comet fell down.

Pazhuvettaraiyar wanted to go to Kudanthai town. He made a wild guess about
the direction of the town and started walking fast in that direction. He placed his
feet firmly on the ground and walked steadily. He saw many trees that had fallen
because of the storm and the floods. The whole place was water logged because
of the rains and because the river breached its boundaries.

Pazhuvettaraiyar did not mind the hurdles on his way. He walked towards
Kudanthai with determination. The storm raging inside his mind in a strange
way fortified his body. But he was losing time. Pretty fast. When he reached
Kudanthai it was more than an hour and a half after sunrise.

He did not want to go into the town. If people saw him in that condition they
might ask unnecessary and unpleasant questions. He did not mind answering
them. But if he did then he might not have the time to carry out his critical
mission.

He wanted to identify somebody at the outskirts of the town and entrust him the
task of sending messages to Thanjavur and Nagappattinam. And then he should
manage to get some horse to rush to Kadambur.

He remembered the place of Kundanthai astrologer who lived near the Durga
Parameswari temple. That was a secluded area. There were no houses nearby.
The astrologer was reliable. The astrologer had sweet manners and a gift of
words.

But the astrologer was close to the Chief Minister as well as to the Emperor’s
family. So what? Anybody would love to do this job. After all the lives of the
Emperor and his sons were at stake.

And that was the right time to find out whether the astrologer really knew
astrology and whether astrology was a real science as claimed by him.

Pazhuvettaraiyar approached the astrologer’s house which was near the temple.
The huge tree that used to be in front of the temple had fallen down. That was
the first thing that grabbed his attention. The second one was the chariot parked
near the temple. There were two horses in the front. The structure of the chariot
was quite strange. The upper part of the vehicle resembled a boat. These special
chariots were used during times of floods. Should there be a need to cross a huge
river in floods the upper part of the chariot could be used as a boat to cross the
river. The horses would swim across the river.

These chariots were quite rare in the Chozha Kingdom.

Whose chariot is this? Must belong to the Palace. Or the Chief Minister. The
occupants of this strange vehicle must be inside the Astrologer’s house. They
may be consulting him on matters of national importance. Who might that be?
Will the chariot driver be able to share the information? No, he may probably be
frightened by my presence. The best way is to just barge into the astrologer’s
place and find it out myself. I can even borrow this chariot to go to Kadambur.

When Pazhuvettaraiyar reached the entrance of the astrologer’s house he heard
women’s voices. He was shocked.

Oh My God! Princess Kunthavai! Why has she come here and that too at this
time?

Then Pazhuvettaraiyar heaved a sigh of relief.

In a way it is good. If I can share the secrets with Princess Kunthavai, then to
that extent I will feel relieved.

If I can tell her that the lives of her father and her brothers are at risk, that
shrewd girl may do something to save them. Then I can peacefully leave for
Kadambur. My main duty is to avert the catastrophe at Kadambur.

When Pazhuvettaraiyar crossed the main door his entry was blocked by the
sentry – the astrologer’s disciple. The disciple could not recognise
Pazhuvettaraiyar in that condition. He shouted at him and tried to block his way.
Pazhuvettaraiyar grunted and placed his hand on his neck and shoved him away.
The man tumbled and fell on the street. Pazhuvettaraiyar walked into the house
like an elephant that had gone mad.

Chapter 13: Kunthavai Seeks A Boon

When the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar entered the astrologer’s house at the outskirts
of Kundanthai town, Kunthavai and Vanathi were already there.

Kunthavai felt restless as she had not seen the Mute Queen since morning. The
fact that Poonkuzhali was also missing disturbed her even more. She sought an
audience with the Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar.

By that time news about Prince Arulmozhivarman had reached the Chief
Minister. The Prince had to come out of his hiding because of the storm.
Thousands of people were bringing the Prince to the capital city with all the
fanfare. Kunthavai was excited at first. And then afraid. The Prince coming to
the capital city and that too with a crowd of people would complicate things. She
wanted to meet Ponniyin Selvan on the way and apprise him of the
developments.

If the Prince chose to enter the Thanjavur Fort with the crowd then
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s soldiers might block him. Meanwhile Kunthavai knew that
Chieftain Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari had reached Kodumbalur with a large army
gathered from the South. Kesari’s army and Pazhuvettaraiyar’s army might clash
near the capital city, Thanjavur. And if that happened the Emperor would be
devastated. It might even threaten his life. Nobody could even guess what
dangers a sudden civil war would bring.

The recent storm had wrought havoc not only on the coastal areas of the
Kingdom but on the minds of the people as well. Even the slightest provocation
might lead to a bloody civil war. There was no way to stop it. It was easier and

wiser to prevent such a war than trying to stop it after it started. If the civil war
was not averted all the efforts taken by her during the past years would go waste.

With these thoughts raging in her mind Kunthavai was planning to meet her
younger brother Prince Arulmozhivarman on the way and take him to her place,
Pazhaiyaarai and retain him there for some time. Then she would invite
Pazhuvettaraiyar from Kadambur to tell him that Prince Arulmozhi was not keen
on becoming the King. And then she planned to take her brother Arulmozhi to
Thanjavur with the blessings of the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

Once the plans were in place Kunthavai became restless. She did not reveal her
plans to her sick father; she just told her mother and the Chief Minister and left
Thanjavur. She wanted to see the famous Kudanthai Astrologer before going to
Pazhaiyaarai. While in trouble it is human nature to have a glimpse of the future.
There was no surer way of having that glimpse than consulting the most popular
astrologer of the Kingdom at that time.

Kunthavai ordered her chariot to be parked at the usual palace near the Amman
Temple and went into the astrologer’s house. She was halfway through her
woeful narration when she heard a ruckus at the door. When she heard
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s unmistakable grunting sound she had goose bumps. It
appeared as if the old warrior was pushing aside the Astrologer’s assistant and
was barging in.

Kunthavai thought fast.

How did he come here? And why? And that too at this time?

Perhaps he too may have come to consult the astrologer. Perhaps if I eavesdrop
on his conversation with the astrologer then I may know what is there in his
mind. The Royal Household is in the grips of a nasty crisis. So is the rest of the
country. Knowing Pazhuvettaraiyar’s thoughts will give me the clarity on the
current situation, something I badly need now. I have got this rare opportunity to
know what he thinks. But what will he think if he sees me and Vanathi here? He
is sure to think ill of us. So it is better that he does not see us. Let us hide
somewhere inside the house.

Kunthavai communicated her hiding plan to the astrologer by sign language. She
then grabbed Vanathi’s hand and ran into the next room. The moment she closed
the door of that room Pazhuvettaraiyar entered the main hall of the house.

Pazhuvettaraiyar saw an excited astrologer paying respects to him with
trembling hands. The astrologer could see some surprise as well as a sense of
disappointment in the face of the old warrior. But that was only for a second.
Pazhuvettaraiyar meanwhile steadied himself and spoke in his usual majestic
tone.

“Can’t you recognise me, Astrologer? Yes, I am the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Why are you staring at me? Have I
changed a lot or what? I need your help in a big way. First give me something to
eat. I am famished. Let’s talk while I am eating.”

The astrologer was shocked. And yet he managed to speak in a trembling voice.

“What help can this poor man offer you, Your Highness? It’s because of the
good deeds of my ancestors that Your Highness chose to visit the humble abode
of this poor soul. I can’t offer you a feast that befits your stature, Your Highness.
But whatever I have in this hut is all yours. Please have a seat. I was shocked on

seeing you. That’s why I could not welcome you properly. Please bear with me,
Your Highness. See my state, I can’t even offer a proper seat to you. Please sit on
this board, Your Highness.”

The astrologer pointed out to the boards on which Kunthavai and Vanathi had
been sitting till then. Pazhuvettaraiyar did not fail to notice the flowers scattered
on those boards.

"I don’t have time, Astrologer. If you can provide me something to eat please
wrap it in a leaf and give it to me. I will eat it on the way. I need to send an
urgent message to Thanjavur – to my brother Kalaanthaka Kandan. Can you
spare me a palm leaf and a writing instrument? On second thoughts I don’t have
time to write a detailed message. I will give my signet ring to you. You will have
to go to Thanjavur carrying an important message. Or if you can’t, send your
disciple standing at the entrance. He looks quite sturdy. Can you put him on the
job, please?”

“I am at your service, Your Highness. I, my disciple and two others will go on
your mission, if you so wish. Honourable Chancellor, I beg of you to stay for a
few more minutes at this poor man’s abode and partake the humble food I can
offer”

“Astrologer, I am surprised why you call yourself humble and poor. I hear that
mighty Kings and great Princesses visit your house quite often to consult you. I
am perhaps the only person who has not consulted you so far. I now realise that
it is a great mistake. Perhaps if I had taken your advice I might have averted
some terrible accidents.”

“The words of Your Highness disturb me a lot. What accidents, Your Highness?
I was shocked to see you in this condition. Were you caught in the floods? I

heard that River Coleroon breached the banks. Perhaps that..... caused...
trouble... Honourable Chancellor? I am sure that the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur is
safe.” –

When Pazhuvettaraiyar heard the last words from the astrologer he broke into a
hysterical laugh.

“No, no. She is not harmed. No, she did not die in floods. She must be safe and
happy at Kadambur palace. But I can’t guarantee whether she will be alive
tomorrow. Can you give a guarantee for her life, Astrologer? I know that you
have the horoscopes of all the members of the Royal family. Is it true? Do you
have Nandini’s horoscope? I mean that devil whom I foolishly married in my
ripe old age?”

The Astrologer was visibly shaken.

“I don’t understand a word of what you are saying, Honourable Chancellor. Are
you by any chance testing me? For the sake of record let me make it very clear –
I don’t have the Junior Queen’s horoscope. But if you tell me her date and time
of birth I can cast her horoscope in no time.”

“No need. I’ll do that myself. I have decided to put an end to her life with my
own hands. If you have studied the horoscopes of the other members of the
Royal family... please tell me about their future. How long will the Emperor
live? I see that you are shaking your head. I know you won’t share that
information with me. You think I am testing you. Or your astrology is a pseudo
science. It’s all quackery and charlatanism. Who knows? Ok, let horoscopes
wait. We have been seeing a comet in the skies recently. And the comet fell
down and vanished today morning. Do you know that? And if you do, can you
tell me its astrological significance? Does it point out to any imminent disaster?

Does it mean that the Emperor or his children are in danger? If you refuse to tell
this too, then I am sure your astrology is phony.”

“Honourable Chancellor, please don’t jump to conclusions. It has been a timehonoured astrological tradition that we do not predict events on the political
front. I did not see the comet falling down. I saw a bright light. I ran out to see
what happened. I could not see the comet. Its tail has been shrinking in size for
the past few days. Some say that the appearance and falling of a comet signifies
good luck for the Royal family. But that’s not astrology. It’s just the belief of
people. I don’t believe that. I learnt this morning that Emperor is doing fine.”

“That’s our good fortune, Astrologer. I pray nothing should happen to the
Emperor till tomorrow. If he survives till tomorrow then we need not have any
worries on his life. Do you know anything about Ponniyin Selvan?”

“I heard that he reached the town of Thiruvarur late last night. Chancellor, I hear
that he is surrounded by thousands of people. And that he is being dragged to
Thanjavur against his wishes.”

“If only they take him safely to Thanjavur that will be a great help for me. But
can they? Even if he is surrounded by hundreds of thousands of people can they
stop the Lord of Death from approaching him? You tell me, Astrologer. You tell
me. I know you won’t share your astrological predictions with me. But let me do
it for you. A great danger awaits the Emperor and his two sons today. It’s lifethreatening. Death for the Emperor is hiding in the underground Treasury of
Pazhuvur. Death for Prince Arulmozhivarman is hiding in the goad usually
carried by an elephant-mahout. Now it is your responsibility to stop these people
and save the Emperor and his son. Let your disciple carry my signet ring and
rush to Thanjavur. You go to Thiruvarur to warn Prince Arulmozhi. Can you do
it for me, please? Can you leave right now?”

The astrologer was shocked. He even suspected the sanity of the old warrior. But
he was not sure. Pazhuvettaraiyar talked sense. Yes, he was excited. But he was
telling the truth. Princess Kunthavai must be hearing his words. The astrologer
wanted to know the Princess’ reaction to these words. He wanted to dispose of
Pazhuvettaraiyar as fast as he could.

“With the blessings of Goddess Durga Parameswari I will execute your orders to
the best of my abilities.”

The two men heard the sound of anklets coming from inside the house.

“Great! Durga Parameswari shakes her anklets to signify her assent. I can return
to Kadambur in peace. I am leaving now.”

“Chancellor, you said you were hungry. Why don’t you eat something at this
poor man’s hut?”

“No need, Astrologer. All my hunger and thirst are gone. I need to fly to
Kadambur if that is physically possible. I saw a chariot near the temple outside.
Whose chariot is that, Astrologer? Whosoever may be the owner I am going to
take it up to River Coleroon and then send it back. I will take the boat attached to
the chariot.”

“Your Highness! That chariot.... that chariot..... Please have mercy on me. Please
don’t take that chariot with you. Please... I beg of you... “

“You don’t have to worry about that, Astrologer. I am using that Chariot for a
noble mission – to save the life of our Crown Prince. Even Goddess Durga Devi
will not object to that. She will make a sound with her anklets once again to
signify her assent. And if she does I will presume that she blesses my mission.
Now listen.”

Princess Kunthavai opened the door of the next room and was walking towards
the two men with the clinking sound of her anklets. The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar
was not shocked to see her. He was not even surprised.

“Devi, I guessed you were there in the next room. Honestly I did not have the
courage to talk to you face to face. I almost shouted because I wanted you to
hear me. I am sure you heard whatever I spoke to the astrologer.”

“Please forgive me. Please bear with me. I apologise for my behaviour. When
you entered the house suddenly I could not guess it was you. That made me
snoop on your conversation. I am sorry.”

“I am the one who should beg for your pardon, Devi. I am not sure whether I am
good enough to seek your pardon. If I can run to Kadambur before nightfall and
save the life of Crown Prince, well, then perhaps I may be qualified to seek your
forgiveness. Three years, Devi. For three full years the eyes of this old man were
covered by blind lust. You tried your best to open my eyes. You gave me several
hints, some subtle, and some not so subtle. But I understood nothing. My
younger brother Kalaanthaka Kandan tried to alert me. He failed. Only last night
thanks to the grace of Goddess Durga Parameswari I could overhear the
conversation between two conspirators from Pandya Kingdom. And now I know
the truth. The whole truth. I had been keeping that devil, that evil bitch in my
palace all along. She made me a traitor. She made me betray the Chozha clan.
She took gold from our Chozha treasury and gave it to the conspirators from
Pandya Kingdom. Unless I kill that evil bitch Nandini before nightfall today the
anger in my heart will not be quenched.”

Princess Kunthavai did something unexpected. She fell at the feet of the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. Pazhuvettaraiyar did not know what to do. He was in a state of
shock. Kunthavai got up and spoke to him in a choked voice:

“Please... I seek a boon from you.”

“Princess, it seems that you are testing me. Please don’t do that. I beg of you,
please don’t do that. Only recently I realised how heinous my sins are. I am
looking for ways of atonement. But my first mission is to save the three
members of Chozha family from the impending danger. Your father and your
two brothers should not be harmed. That is my mission now. You should help
me, Princess. Leave me alone today. Tomorrow I will come to you and ask for a
suitable punishment and retribution for my crimes.”

“I will never punish you or suggest any atonement. You are my grandfather. My
father worships you. I beg of a boon from you. Please... don’t refuse it...”

“Ask, Princess. Make it fast. We don’t have all the time in the world.”

“First promise me that you will give whatever I ask for.”

“I have betrayed you and your family. Whatever I have with me will not
compensate you for the wrongs I have done to your family. And yet, I promise to
give whatever you ask from me. Make it fast, Princess.”

“Promise me that you won’t hurt your Junior Queen, Nandini. This is the boon I
seek from you.”

“Are you kidding, Devi? This is not the time for games. It is true that I lost my
senses during my old age. But do you want to see me mad? Unless I punish that
devil how the hell can I punish her accomplices and other conspirators? I am
going to kill her with my own hands. I will bare my mind to her. I will make her
understand that she cannot cheat this old man for a long time. And then I will
kill her with my own sword. Any lesser punishment will not meet the ends of
justice. And only then I will think of a just punishment for me. Go, my dear girl,
go. Take all efforts to save your father and your brother from danger.”

“I will, Patta. But should I not try to save my sister? Do you know that Junior
Queen Nandini is my own sister? If you hurt her you’ll be hurting the Chozha
clan.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar was shocked. His mouth muttered ‘Am I still dreaming?’

“No, no. You are not dreaming. This is real. As real as real can be. Just think of
it. Let me recollect some incidents for you. Do you remember the noble lady
who saved my brother Arulmozhi from drowning in River Cauvery? She is
Nandini’s mother. On the day you married Nandini and brought her home my
father fainted. Do you remember that? My father thought he was seeing
Nandini’s mother, his first love. My father believes that his first wife is dead. So
when she saw her look-alike, Nandini, it was too much for him. He swooned.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar remembered a few other incidents. At Nandini’s insistence he
had taken her to visit the Emperor at midnight. The Emperor screamed on seeing
her. And Nandini had her own reasons for that. Pazhuvettaraiyar remembered
them all.

“Oh My God! Princess, I am now convinced that you are not playing any games
with me. Destiny is playing a cruel game in our lives. If Nandini is your sister
then she becomes a sister of Adithya Karikalan as well. Who else knows about
this relationship? Does the Emperor know?”

“Till two days ago the Emperor believed that his first wife was dead. Day before
yesterday when that woman visited our place my father thought it was an
apparition and tried to throw a lamp at her. And only much later we were able to
convince him that she is alive.”

“I am not asking about that Princess. Does Karikalan know that Nandini is his
sister?”

“He should have known by now. He had sent a message to me through a warrior
of the Vaana clan. I asked him to carry this message to my brother.”

“Oh, you are talking about Vallavaraiyan Vandhiya Thevan?”

“Yes.”

“I don’t think he would have communicated that to Karikalan. Even if he had
Karikalan would not have believed him. Even I could not believe that at first.
How will he? Nandini could not have known this. Even if she did there is no use.
The conspirators will try some other means to accomplish their mission. Devi,
this news has increased my responsibility. I should now save Nandini from the
terrible sin of fratricide. I am leaving for Kadambur right now. I am taking your

chariot, Princess. It is your responsibility to save the Emperor and Ponniyin
Selvan.”

“You need not worry. I am leaving for Thanjavur right now. I will get another
vehicle from Pazhaiyaarai for my journey. You need not worry about Ponniyin
Selvan. The stars are on his side. They will guard him.”

“My dear girl, don’t believe in astrology. Astrologers know everything but will
not share their knowledge with you. They will use ambiguous language to save
their skin. After the event they will twist their own words to tell you, ‘Didn’t I
say so earlier?’ You can believe in astrology but not the astrologers.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar was gone.

A few seconds later Azhwarkkadian entered the house.

“I second the words of the Honourable Chancellor. We can believe astrology but
not the astrologers.”

Chapter 14: Vanathi Takes A Vow

Kunthavai was shocked to see Azhwarkkadian at the astrologer’s house.

“Thirumalai, how did you suddenly spring up here? What brought you here?”

“Devi, all because of the false words of this astrologer. I consulted him this
morning. I had a simple question. ‘Will I succeed in what I am about to do?’ He
said, ‘Yes. You will.’ But I could not go even a short distance from this place let
alone succeeding in my task. That is why I earnestly second the words of
Pazhuvettaraiyar. I am wondering whether astrology itself is false or this
astrologer is a cheat. I wanted to know that first hand and hence came here.
When I heard the voice of Pazhuvettaraiyar here I started doubting the intentions
of this man. But believe me, Devi; I never expected to see you here.”

“You could not have expected me here. It was a last minute decision. But tell me
why did you come here? What are you up to? Was it so important that you
decided to consult an astrologer on the outcome? I hope it is not a secret.”

“There cannot be any secret which is not known to you, Devi. Acting on the
wishes of the Emperor, the Chief Minister ordered me to go to Nagapattinam. I
was to bring the Prince to Thanjavur. On the way I was to see the Queen Mother
Sembian Madevi and give her a message. But when did you leave Thanjavur,
Devi?”

“A little after dawn this morning. Why do you ask that, Thirumalai?”

“I want to know whether Kodumbalur army has laid siege for Thanjavur Fort.”

“Oh My God!”

“Yes, Devi. I am sure you are aware of the developments. When the Chief
Minister returned to his house after meeting the Emperor last night two messages
were waiting for him. The first was that Prince Arulmozhi had left Nagapattinam
and was headed for Thanjavur along with a crowd of excited people.”

“I also heard that news. I came here only to stop my brother on the way. What is
the other news?”

Azhwarkkadian ignored her question. He pointed out to Princess Vanathi and
spoke to Kunthavai.

“Devi, why did you bring this Kodumbalur Princess along?”

“She comes with me wherever I go. Why did you ask that question?”

“I am a little hesitant to disclose the second news in her presence, Devi.”

“Please go ahead. You know how dear this girl is to me. Whatever I can know,
she also can.”

“But Devi the second message concerns this Princess. The General of the
Chozha Army’s Southern Command Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari is marching
towards the Thanjavur Fort along with a huge army. That is the news the Chief
Minister got last night. The General had also sent a message to the Chief
Minister. In that message the General had accused the Pazhuvettaraiyars – that
they are holding the Emperor hostage at the Thanjavur Fort and Prince
Arulmozhivarman as a prisoner in some undisclosed location. The General has
demanded that the Pazhuvettaraiyars should give up the posts of the Chancellor
and the responsibility of securing the Capital city immediately. They should
entrust Prince Arulmozhivarman back to the Emperor, And if they failed to do
any of these the General would lay siege to the Thanjavur Fort from this
evening. Devi, I am sure you know that the Kodumbalur Army has reached near
Thanjavur from the South and West.”

“No, I don’t know. The Chief Minister did not even breathe a word about these
developments.”

“If he did you would not have left the Thanjavur Fort. More importantly the
Chief Minister might have wanted to evacuate this Kodumbalur Princess from
the Fort.”

“But why? What will happen if she is there with me?”

“The Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar might imprison her or might even try to hurt her.”

“Do you think he is that rash? Are you telling the truth?”

“Yes, Devi. You will believe me if you know the message sent by the General of
Southern Command.”

“What else was there in his message?”

“The wedding of Prince Arulmozhivarman and this Kodumbalur Princess should
happen right away. As the Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan does not want to
rule, Prince Arulmozhi should be made the Crown Prince. And the General has
warned that if all his demands are not met then he will raze the Thanjavur Fort to
ground within three days. He has also written that the people of the Chozha
Kingdom are with him in his mission.”

Vanathi was listening to every word spoken by Azhwarkkadian. She finally
spoke.

“Akka, I wonder if my uncle has gone mad.”

“No, Vanathi. He hasn’t. Your uncle is just telling what is already there in the
minds of many people. You know that the Pazhuvettaraiyars want
Madhuranthakan to be crowned. They are working in that direction. The
Chieftains of Kodumbalur and Thirukkovalur are expressing their wishes to
counter the actions of Pazhuvettaraiyars.”

“You are right, Devi. Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman might have gathered a huge
army by now and would have approached the Kadambur Fort. I was talking to
him and I guessed this might happen. Espionage reports reaching the Chief
Minister confirm this.

“The problem is that these two people do not know what I know. I will have to
talk to these people and somehow avert a major civil war. I don’t know how I am
going to do that.”

“Devi, the situation is really bad. Looks like we cannot prevent a war which will
be like that of a Mahabharatha war.”

“That’s an apt metaphor, Thirumalai. If there is a war now it will be between
brothers and cousins. It will be a totally destructive war fought by blood
relatives. Vanathi, I am sure you know our history. Listen. My grandfather’s
father, the great and famous Emperor Paranthaka married a woman from the
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s family. His daughter – my grandmother’s sister – married the
then Kodumbalur King. My grandfather Arinjaya Chozhar married a woman
from the Kodumbalur Family. My father married from the Thirukkovalur
Malaiyaman’s family. Thus all the three clans – Pazhuvettaraiyars, the
Kodumbalur Kings and the Malaiyamans are closely related to the Chozha clan.
Because of the marriages the three clans are closely bound to one another. But
now these three clans are arraigned on the opposite sides of an impending war.
That is the cruel game played by destiny. I am afraid that a war amongst these
clans will destroy the mighty Chozha Empire.”

“Akka, I couldn’t care less about the impending war. Let them fight among
themselves and destroy the whole clan. Who cares? But why the hell should my
father’s brother drag my name in the controversy? I want to fight with my uncle
right now.”

“What’s the use, dear? Your uncle will never listen to you. Even if you and I
plead with tears in our eyes he won’t listen. In his eyes we are still kids. Old men
like your uncle will never listen to our advice. The only way to stop this civil
war is through my brother Arulmozhivarman.

Thirumalai, why did you retreat from your journey? Do you know where
Arulmozhi is now?”

“I heard that he had planned to leave Thiruvarur last night. But as all the roads
are flooded he could not progress much. I wanted to go beyond Pazhaiyaarai to
meet him. But I could not go. Hence I returned. River Kudamurutti has breached
its banks and all the nearby roads are flooded.”

“Waters will recede sooner or later. Arulmozhi has to cross this way. We will
have to wait for him. There is no other go. I am worried meanwhile things might
get complicated in Thanjavur. Thirumalai, can you do me a favour? Go to
Thanjavur right now. Meet the Kodumbalur Chieftain and give my message to
him. You will have to request him to defer his plans to lay siege to the Thanjavur
Fort till Arulmozhi returns.”

“Akka, can I go with him to Thanjavur?”

“Why?”

“I will fight with my uncle.”

“How will you fight with him? Do you think he will listen to you? Do you think
he will stop this war?”

“Let him stop the war or continue the war. I don’t care. Let him go to hell. Who

cares? I will plead with him not to drag my name in this affair.”

“Why should your name be dragged in this?”

“Akka, didn’t you hear what this Vaishnavite told a few minutes earlier?”

Vanathi blushed as she spoke.

“Who talked about you? Thirumalai, did you say anything about this girl?”

“Didn’t I say that one of the demands of the General is to marry off this girl to
Ponniyin Selvan? Perhaps this girl is referring to that, Devi.”

“I am surprised, Vanathi. Why should you object to that? Don’t you want to
marry Ponniyin Selvan?”

“That is not the issue now, Akka. But why should he talk about the marriage
now? My father’s brother is trying to link my marriage with the issue of
succession. I am objecting to that, Akka. For the world it might appear that my
uncle has started this war only to make me the Queen of Chozha Empire.”

Awoman’s derisive voice was heard.

“Oh, so Kodumbalur Princess does not like to sit on the Chozha throne! Great!”

Everybody looked in the direction of that voice. Poonkuzhali had come in.

Kunthavai was surprised.

“Hey girl, how did you come here? We have been searching for you and the
Mute Queen since morning. Where is she?”

“Please forgive me, Devi. My aunt forced me out of the Palace through the
underground passage at the Pazhuvur Palace. She did not like my staying in the
Thanjavur Palace even for a day. I also don’t like the Palace life. When
Kodumbalur Princess can hate sitting on the throne why can’t somebody like me
hate living in the Palace?”

“Are you all right, girl? Or are you under stress? I am asking something and you
are talking about something else.”

Vanathi intervened in their conversation.

“She is perfectly all right, Akka. She is trying to insult me. She thinks that I am
yearning for the Chozha throne. And she thinks that is the only reason I want to
marry your brother, I mean, Ponniyin Selvan. I know how her mind works.”

“Only a snake can know the ways of another snake.” Poonkuzhali was at her

sarcastic best.

“Stop it girls! You have chosen the worst time to fight with each other. Tell me
Poonkuzhali, where is your aunt?”

“She is in the underground treasury attached to the Pazhuvur Palace.”

“Oh My God! Why?”

“An assassin armed with a spear is hiding there. You should have seen how we
tormented him in the early hours of morning today. He thought we were ghosts.
He was scared and was running around. Even now I can’t control my laughing.”

Poonkuzhali laughed aloud.

‘Crazy girl’, thought Princess Kunthavai.

“Tell me, who is that assassin. Why is he hiding there? How did you people
know?”

“I don’t know, Devi. My Aunt can neither talk nor hear. But her intuition is very
powerful. She can know things which we can’t know with our sense organs.
Somehow she found out that the person is hiding there to kill somebody in the
Palace. Do you remember that my aunt once tried to break the hands of the
Ravana statue? Do you know the reason?”

“I don’t know. Tell me if you do.”

“When my aunt tried to break the hands of the Ravana statue all of you saw her
as a mad woman. But my aunt is not mad; she is very shrewd. The entrance to
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s treasury is between the hands of the Ravana statue.”

“Oh My God! I never knew that.”

“Now I know how the Lankan Queen entered the Palace.” – Azhwarkkadian.

“We have been living in the Palace all our lives. And yet we do not know about
the existence of that passage. Ok, let it be. Now tell me, why didn’t you tell us
earlier? Why did you leave your aunt alone?”

“All because of my aunt’s obstinacy. She told me that she would take care of the
assassin and wanted me to get out of the Palace.”

“But why? Did she send you on a more important mission?”

“Yes, Devi.”

“What the hell is that?”

“I presume that Ponniyin Selvan is also in danger. My aunt must have known
that by her intuitive powers. So she sent me to him.”

“Oh, you too were going to him? But why did you stop on the way?”

“I don’t want to hide anything from you Devi. I have decided not to poke my
nose in the affairs of the Palace. I was going to my place, Kodikkarai. I met this
Vaishnavite on the way and he brought me here. I would not have come here had
I known that you are here.”

“Hey girl, why do you hate the Palace so much? Why do you hate us, girl? Who
hurt you?”

Kunthavai asked her in a concerned voice.

“Nobody hurt me. Nobody is to be blamed. Some hate the throne. I hate the
Palace and the people living there. That’s all.”

Poonkuzhali looked at Vanathi through the corners of her eyes. A sarcastic smile
formed on her beautiful lips.

Princess Vanathi acted as if she were possessed. She took a step forward and
roared:

“Akka, she is targeting me. Let the whole world hear what I am about to say.
Akka, I swear this on your blessed feet. I swear this in the name of Mother
Earth, in the name of the Goddess of the Skies. If Ponniyin Selvan is saved from
danger this time and if he marries me, if I am blessed to be his wife then I swear
that I will never sit on the Chozha throne. This is a promise. This is a promise.
This is a promise!”

Chapter 15: The Roof Floated

Nobody expected that Kodumbalur Princess Vanathi would take such a terrible
vow. Everybody was shocked.

Kunthavai’s voice was full of love which manifested as anger.

“What happened to you, dear? Why the hell did you take such a terrible vow? I
can’t think of anything more foolish than that. You spoke and acted as if you
were possessed by an evil spirit.”

“No, Akka. I am not possessed. My mind is very clear. I have been thinking
about this for the past several days. I decided long back. And today I just
announced my decision to the world.”

Before Kunthavai could think of a response for Vanathi’s words she was
distracted by the sound of Poonkuzhali laughing. Now it appeared as if
Poonkuzhali was possessed. She laughed like a mad woman. Then she covered
her face with her hands and cried. She sobbed. And then she stopped crying and
started singing in a soft voice.

When the sea is still and so is the wave
Why should the inner sea rant and rave
When the earth-maid is asleep

Why should the heart be restless and weep

Kunthavai spoke to Azhwarkkadian.

“These two girls are sure to drive me insane. Thirumalai, did you not go out to
see the Prince? Why did you come here with this girl?”

“Devi, I did venture out to see Ponniyin Selvan. All the roads are flooded. I
could not go any further. Then I saw this girl. She was also stranded like me. She
told me that if I got her a boat she would row me to Thiruvarur. So I came back
to this astrologer to seek his help. I saw your chariot near the temple Devi along
with the attached boat. I was very happy. I thought I could borrow your boat. But
Pazhuvettaraiyar has taken both the chariot and the boat.”

“What do you suggest, Thirumalai? Did you hear what Pazhuvettaraiyar said?”

“I did, Devi. After hearing him I feel that every second we wait here seems like a
hundred years. If we believe the words of this girl then our Emperor is in danger.
Even the Chief Minister does not know that. I suggest that you and Kodumbalur
Princess go to Thanjavur right now. If the Fort is under siege by the Kodumbalur
army nobody other than you can enter the Fort. And if Vanathi is with you then it
will be better. I can console this boat-girl, manage to get a boat and reach
Ponniyin Selvan. I have already sent the astrologer’s disciple to fetch a boat for
us.”

Vanathi stood up and screeched.

“NO. I WON’T GO TO THANJAVUR. I WILL GO ONLY TO SEE PONNIYIN
SELVAN. EVEN IF I WERE TO DIE I’D RATHER DIE AT HIS FEET.”

Poonkuzhali was disturbed. She spoke to Azhwarkkadian in a shrill voice.

“Vaisnavite! I can’t come with you. My lovers at Kodikkarai are calling me. You
know my lovers emit fire during nights. They want me there. I showed them to
the warrior of the Vaana clan who acted as Princess Kunthavai’s messenger. I
want to go to them. Right now.” Poonkuzhali almost shouted.

The astrologer who did not take part in their conversation till then screamed.

“ALL OF YOU KEEP QUIET. PLEASE.”

Everything stopped. Nobody spoke. No sound was heard except of course the
sound of an approaching apocalypse. The sound created goose bumps in
everybody. It was the sound of the end of the world. The sound of the sea about
to consume the land. The sound of a storm about to annihilate everything on its
way.

“Ladies! You came to this poor man’s house at the wrong time. I have been
predicting the future for the entire nation. It’s a pity I could not predict your
future and warn you in advance. I’ve been such a fool.” The astrologer lamented.

“What danger can come to us here?” Princess Kunthavai asked.

“Devi, the river nearby, Arasalaaru is in floods. It is likely to breach its Northern
banks. My disciple warned me in the morning. And if Arasalaaru breaches the
banks, then the water will come to Cauvery. And if Cauvery is consequently
flooded then my house will go under water. Because this place is very close to
River Cauvery. Out. Get out everybody. FAST.”

The Astrologer ran out of his house urging others to follow him. A shocked
Astrologer pointed to something at a distance. His face had gone pale. A rare
scene was unfolding in the Southwest, the direction he pointed out. A green wall
half as tall as a coconut tree and very wide was moving towards the Astrologer’s
house very fast making a great noise. It took a few seconds for them to recognise
that the moving wall was nothing but River Cauvery in floods breaching its
banks and boundaries.

“Devi! Please come. All of you please come. Let’s go to the Mandapam at the
nearby Amman Temple. There is no other way to escape. Thirumalai, in a way
it’s better you have sent my disciple to fetch a boat for you. We can use that to
get out of this place. Now come fast.”

He guided them to the Mandapam in the temple. They all went in. Poonkuzhali’s
fury had vanished. She reassured Princess Kunthavai.

“Don’t worry, Devi. I have seen worse floods. We will be fine.” She was the first
to reach the Mandapam and got into it quickly.

By that time water had reached the temple and surrounded it on all the four
sides. It was up to the knee-level of those who had not got in. The Astrologer
and Azhwarkkadian managed to climb up with great difficulty. Kunthavai and
Vanathi were still in water. They tried to climb up. Poonkuzhali extended her
hand to Kunthavai and lifted her up. Vanathi was left alone. She tried to climb up

twice and failed. Kunthavai and Poonkuzhali tried to help her. While Kunthavai
was holding one of her hands, Poonkuzhali was holding the other. Vanathi
looked up. When she saw Poonkuzhali holding her hand she used force to free
herself from her grip. In the jerk caused by her actions her other hand slipped
from Kunthavai’s hand. Vanathi fell into the water with an audible thud. The
water had reached to the level of her neck. She could not firmly stand on her
legs. She started floating in water. The force of the flowing water dragged her
away from the temple.

All these happened in a fraction of the second. Those standing on the Mandapam
screamed.

The water took her to the roof of the astrologer’s house. She stood on the top of
the roof. “Thank God! I am out of danger”, thought the poor girl.

Other people saw her. They saw her clinging to the roof of the house. They also
felt relieved. ‘Let her be there for some time. As soon as the boat comes we can
rescue her.’

“Hold it tight. Don’t leave it.” They all shouted to her. Vanathi obeyed. But after
a while the roof started moving.

‘Oh My God! My house is falling down.’ The astrologer was worried more for
the girl than for his house.

Soon the walls of the house gave in. The roof did not fall. It now started floating
freely in water.

Vanathi floated along maintaining a tight grip on the detached roof. She turned
towards the temple.

“Akka, I am going to see him. Yes, I am going to see Ponniyin Selvan. Mother
Cauvery is taking me to him.” Vanathi shouted.

Vanathi was sure that they would have heard her. At least Poonkuzhali would
have heard her.

The roof of the Astrologer’s house floated on water. Vanathi was on that roof
going wherever the flowing river might take her.

Chapter 16: Poonkuzhali Springs Into Action

Those who had been to the Chozha Kingdom in those days would have noticed a
peculiar feature in its topography. There is an ancient adage that the Chozha
Kingdom is famous for its abundance of food. That is mainly due to the rivers
that flow through the kingdom. When these rivers are flooded the banks are
easily breached as the land is generally at a lower level than the rivers. This is
the greatest strength of the Kingdom as well as its worst weakness. Water easily
flows out of the rivers through the canals to irrigate the low-lying lands.

The problem is to contain the flow of the rivers within their respective banks.
Strong, high-rise banks had to be built to contain the rivers. In the absence of
such banks during heavy rains the rivers would flood their banks and even
change their course. That would make the entire area a marshland not suitable
for agriculture.

The Chozha Kings knew this very well. They were particularly careful in
building and fortifying the banks of the main rivers and their tributaries. The
great Chozha King Karikal Valavan used the prisoners of war he brought from
Sri Lanka to build the banks of River Cauvery in several places.

In order to direct the flow of water and ensure that the water-level does not go
down for the tributaries the Chozha Kings built the Grand Anaicut, or the
Kallanai as it is popularly known, at a distance of about ten miles from
Srirengam, near Thiruchirapalli. After the dam was built the water flow in the
tributaries increased.

In this manner the gift of nature and the hard work of mankind joined hands to

make Chozha Kingdom rich in water resources. No other Tamil Kingdom could
compete with the Chozhas in that department.

Nature’s gift of abundant water resources came with all its attendant evils and
dangers. Storms and hurricanes appeared frequently in the seas near the Eastern
Coast of the Kingdom These storms travelled northwards and brought rains to
the delta areas of Krishna and Godavari rivers or a little farther in the Kalinga
Kingdom. Along with the rains there would also be heavy losses of properties
and lives. At times the storm would enter the Chozha Kingdom and travel west
between Coleroon Delta and Kodikkarai and cause heavy damage on the way.
This had happened many times in the past. At times these storms would turn
violent and make the sea turbulent and destroy the coastal towns.

Poompuhar, also known as Kaveripoompattinam, one of the major Chozha Ports,
was thus destroyed by a raging sea. It is a historical fact supported by evidence.

Small towns near the river banks would vanish in floods. People sought refuge in
temples during those times.

Adithya Chozhan, son of Vijayaalaya Chozhan, built 108 temples of Lord Shiva
along the path of River Cauvery, right from its source at Sahasya Hills till it
reached the sea, the Bay of Bengal. People worshipped the Lord in those temples
during normal times. During floods the temples served as Flood Shelters.
Perhaps that was the motive behind Adithya Chozhan building these temples
along the course of River Cauvery.

When a river breaches its banks its course is changed. Arasalaaru and
Kudamurutti rivers have changed their course several times in the past. This fact
has been recorded in the annals of history.

Parthibendran’s ship came from Srilanka to India. It was caught in a storm.
Prince Arulmozhivarman had to jump into the sea to save Vandhiya Thevan.
Thereafter the storm travelled up north, crossed the coast near Kalinga Kingdom
and then disappeared.

But the storm which devastated the coastal town of Nagapattinam when Prince
Arulmozhivarman was in the Choodamani Monastery entered the Chozha
Kingdom, wrought havoc on its way and then moved westward. It continued its
dance of destruction on both the sides of Cauvery and finally reached the Kongu
country and disappeared. It left a gory trail of destruction. As if that was not
enough the storm was followed by a torrential downpour. As the storm moved
further west the rains increased in intensity. The rains caused floods in River
Cauvery and all its tributaries. Many of these rivers breached their banks. The
whole of Chozha Kingdom reeled under the impact of floods.

But the natural disaster did not cause any panic amongst people. They were used
to floods. They knew how to handle the situation. The first priority was human
lives. People ran up to the temple corridors or other high-rise areas for safety.
Floods would recede as fast as they came. Those who had lost their homes
would soon build one with help from neighbours. People never had the time or
inclination to sit down and mourn their losses.

The people of Chozha Kingdom, as a race, were optimistic, hardworking and
quite enthusiastic. Otherwise how could they have built such wonderful
monuments which today the whole world is proud of?

When Vanathi could not climb up to the safety of the temple corridor others were
worried about her safety first. But they soon heaved a sigh of relief seeing her
clinging to the roof of the Astrologer’s house.

In fact Princess Kunthavai was happy. She wanted to see how Vanathi managed
a crisis. After all the future wife of one of the most valiant men of Chozha
Kingdom – Prince Arulmozhivarman - should be capable of handling any kind
of crisis. Vanathi was basically a timid girl. Kunthavai had to go out of the way
to make her courageous and confident by simple tricks and play-acting.
Kunthavai was now happy that her efforts were yielding fruit.

Vanathi used to faint quite often. But of late, at least it appeared so far, she had
kicked the habit. And now Vanathi had been given a tough situation to handle by
Mother Nature. Vanathi was clinging on to the roof of a house while being
surrounded by a flooded river. Would Vanathi be afraid? Would she hold on to
her grip till the Astrologer’s disciple came with a rescue boat? She would. There
was no doubt about it. After all so many years of training had ultimately borne
fruit.

Azhwarkkadian’s words snapped Kunthavai’s chain of thoughts.

“Oh My God! What is this, Devi? The roof is moving.”

“The defect is in your eyes. Against the background of moving water the roof
might appear moving. It is an optical illusion.”

But as she spoke these words she too had that doubt.

“No, Devi. Look again.”

“OH MY GOD!” Princess Kunthavai screamed.

“ASTROLOGER WHEN WILL YOUR DISCIPLE RETURN WITH A BOAT?”
Azhwarkkadian shouted.

“I have had enough. There is no point in believing the Astrologer any longer.
Thirumalai, can you save Vanathi? Or else I will have to jump into the water and
rescue her. If something happens to her then I won’t even live for a second
longer.”

“Devi, we should not lose our cool especially in times of danger. I don’t have to
teach you this simple home truth. I am ready to lay down my life to save
Vanathi. But what is the use, Devi? Yes, I can swim across to reach her. Then? I
too can cling to the roof. But tell me will the roof bear the weight of two of us?
In all probability the roof will sink and we both will be drowned. Let us think
before we leap.”

Poonkuzhali laughed. Kunthavai and Azhwarkkadian turned to her.

“Devi, when this Vaishnavite Fanatic is analysing the risks and dangers in this
enterprise Vanathi will die.”

“If that happens, this boat-girl will be very happy.”

Azhwarkkadian’s voice was sarcastic. Poonkuzhali was furious. Azhwarkkadian

continued:

“But Devi, rest assured nothing of that sort will happen. My Lord, who is forever
asleep on a banyan leaf and whose business is to save this world, will save
Vanathi as well. My Lord took the form of a fish, a tortoise and a boar to save
the world. And He will surely show a way for Vanathi. Devi, see there. The
Astrologer’s disciple is coming in a boat.”

In the direction Azhwarkkadian pointed there was a boat which was coming
towards them. The boat had to go up the stream to reach them. The roof along
with Vanathi was going down the stream. It would take a lot of time for the boat
to reach the other people. By the time they all get into the boat and go looking
out for Vanathi she would have gone very far down the stream. She might even
be lost forever.

The best way out was to pick up Vanathi first and then come to the temple to
pick up the rest. But there was no way they could communicate this to the
Astrologer’s disciple who was rowing the boat. They shouted at him. They gave
signals. The poor soul who was struggling with the boat did not understand. He
thought that they all wanted him to row faster. So he started rowing faster
towards the temple going farther and farther away from Vanathi with every
passing second.

Poonkuzhali spoke to Princess Kunthavai.

“Devi, please let me go. I’ll swim across to the boat and then take it to the
Kodumbalur Princess. I will bring her here.”

Kunthavai hesitated. She remembered that Vanathi fell down back into water
because Poonkuzhali offered her a helping hand which she hated to hold.

“Please believe me, Devi. It was because of my recklessness that the Princess
fell back into water. Therefore I have a moral obligation to save her.”

“I believe you; but I don’t trust Vanathi.”

“I know. Perhaps she might refuse to get into the boat if I am there. No issues,
Devi. I will pull her into the boat and then I’ll get off. I’ll jump into the water
and swim back.”

Poonkuzhali did not wait for Kunthavai’s response. She sprang into the river.
She swam fast towards the boat.

Kunthavai turned to the Astrologer.

“Astrologer Sir, till now I believed in astrology. But today I have lost all my
faith in that pseudo-science.”

“On the other hand my faith became complete and unshaken only today, Devi. I
have studied the horoscope of the Kodumbalur Princess. It is very clear. It says
that she has to face a life-threatening risk today. I thought first it will come
through Pazhuvettaraiyar. I was surprised it did not happen that way. I was
shocked and started losing faith in astrology. And then this happened. I am sure
she will come out of danger soon. The lines on her palm... Oh My God... they

are rare. Whatever I have told about her future will come true. I don’t have any
doubt about that.”

“Beautiful, Astrologer. How can it come true? Even if Vanathi is saved your
predictions will be belied. Didn’t you hear her terrible vows?”

“Irrespective of the vows taken by anybody my predictions will come true. And
if it does not, then I will throw my entire palm leaves collection of astrology in
to River Cauvery. I swear on my knowledge of Astrology, Devi.”

Azhwarkkadian was at his sarcastic best.

“Not so fast, Astrologer Sir. River Cauvery did not even wait for you to throw
your palm leaves. She has entered your house on her own and has taken all your
palm leaves. What do you say now?”

The Astrologer realised the import of his words. He was shocked. And yet he
muttered under his breath, ‘My predictions will never fail.’

Chapter 17: The Elephant Goes Wild

It was the day before the events described in the last chapter happened. Prince
Arulmozhivarman was the Royal guest of the people of Nagappattinam. The
townspeople hosted a grand feast in honour of the Prince. After the celebrations
were over the Prince mounted on a decorated elephant. The elephant started to
move. Thousands of people joined the Prince on his historic journey and started
travelling by foot to Thanjavur.

The Prince and the people reached the town of Thiruvarur by nightfall.

The people at Thiruvarur had been informed in advance about the Prince’s visit.
A grand reception was accorded to the Prince. People lined up all the way from
the old part of the town called Gunavasal up to a place called Kudavasal. The
four major streets of the town were packed with people. All the houses on the
main road and the arches on the way were adorned with flowers and festoons.
The Chozha Palace in the town had also been decorated by the officials.
Elaborate arrangements had been made for a feast to be given not only to the
Prince but to all those who had accompanied him.

The storm had crossed the town of Thiruvarur only the previous night. But the
festivities that accompanied the visit of the Prince made the people forget the
calamity. The streets were full of action. Singers, dancers, drummers were
demonstrating their skills on all the streets. There were also demonstrations of
kuravai koothu, a popular form of folk dance, puppet show, sword fights,
silambam the martial art that originated from Tamilnadu, where people fought
with thick sticks.

The Chozha clan was highly devoted to the Dancing Lord, Lord Nataraja of
Chidambaram. And second only to that was the clan’s devotion to the presiding
deity of Thiruvarur, Lord Thiagaraja. They had bestowed enormous grants to the
temple of the town.

Prince Arulmozhivarman had not visited the town so far. The temple officials
insisted that the Prince should visit the temple. The Prince accepted their
invitation and went to the temple.

As a furious storm was raging in the Prince’s mind he could not fully involve
himself in the worship. Special prayers were offered to the Lord on behalf of the
Prince and the holy prasad was given to the Prince.

As they were returning to the Palace the Prince posed a question:

“Why is the Lord called Thiagaraja in this place?”

The priests explained the sacrifice made by the Lord Shiva, the first and the
foremost amongst the Trinity, in order to guard the sentient beings that inhabited
all the three worlds. The Lord who was capable of creating, protecting and
destroying all the three worlds went out of the way to express his love for his
devotees.

In order to help the sentient beings the Lord donned the robes of an ascetic and
did penance in the cremation ground. And then to guard the people from evil the
Lord renounced his penance and married the Holy Mother, Uma Maheswari. The
Lord to whom all the worlds belonged, begged for food like a penniless beggar
all for the sake of the well-being of his devotees. And he danced in

Chidambaram only for the sake of his children. He even went to the extent of
acting as a construction worker in Madurai and bore loads of sand all in
exchange for some sweet meats offered by an old woman. While doing so the
Lord was caned by the reigning Pandya King.

The priests also reminded him of the historical fact that in the ancient days the
Prince’s ancestors lived in that town. They also told him about Manuneethi
Chozhan who sacrificed his own son to render justice to a cow which had lost its
calf due to the recklessness of the Prince.

Their words got etched in the heart of the Prince. He had been wondering about
the great deeds of Buddha till now. He now started to meditate on the sacrifice of
Lord Shiva. The Lord was after all ready to sacrifice Himself for the sake of his
devotees. He had also heard about the story from the West, of the son of God
who laid down his life on the cross for the sake of people. As his thoughts ran on
these lines he was convinced that sacrifice alone made man divine. He was sad
that the people around him were anxious to place the Crown on his head and
make him the King of the vast Chozha Empire. He was for the time being
imprisoned in their love. He started exploring the ways to get out of that prison.

The feast started soon after the Prince returned from the temple. The
townspeople had organized many song and dance events to entertain the Prince.
The Prince was not very keen on watching them. But he did not want to hurt the
feelings of his hosts. He feigned interest in the variety entertainment programme
that followed the feast.

It was almost midnight when the Prince returned to the Palace. Disturbing news
awaited him there. There had been heavy rains west of Thanjavur. River Cauvery
and its tributaries were in spate. The rivers had breached their banks in several
places and most of the roads leading to Thanjavur were waterlogged. The Prince
was advised to stay in Thiruvarur for two days and then resume his journey to
Thanjavur after the floods receded.

The Prince did not pay heed to that advice. He was anxious to reach Thanjavur at
the earliest. Floods and breaches could never hold him back. If so many people
tagged along then he could not move further in floods. But if he chose to ride the
elephant all by himself there was no need to break the journey for floods. The
Prince knew the geography of his country very well. There was no river in the
whole Chozha Kingdom which an elephant could not walk across. Even if there
were such rivers that never deterred the Prince. He had never feared floods.
River Cauvery or Ponni, as she was affectionately known to the people, loved
him like a son. Mother Cauvery rescued him from water when he had an
accidental fall from the boat when he was a child.

But the question now was to escape from the crowd of people who never left
him even for a second. He remembered a similar scene in the great epic,
Ramayana. When Lord Rama was banished from the country and was ordered to
go to the forest the whole city went out with him. The Lord set camp for the
night at the outskirts of the city proclaiming to his followers that they could
resume the journey the next day. But he surreptitiously went away from the
people in the night. Why not I adopt a similar strategy, thought the Prince. In any
case it was prudent to tell the mahout to be ready for a journey any time in the
night.

The Prince wanted to put his plan to action. He summoned an employee of the
Palace and ordered him to bring the mahout to his presence. The employee came
back in a few seconds.

“Your Majesty! He is not around. I can see the elephant tied to a pole at the gates
of the palace. But I can’t see him anywhere near the beast.”

“He might have gone out to see the entertainment programme. Bring him in as
soon as he returns. Or else send some men to look out for him.”

“As you please, Your Majesty. There is a guy at the entrance of the Palace. He
wants to see you. His name is Murugaiyyan. He says it is an emergency.”

The Prince felt a tad guilty that he forgot the kind boatman. Perhaps he might
even help him to escape from the crowd of people. He ordered the employee to
bring him to his presence forthwith.

Murugaiyyan ran up to the Prince and fell at his feet sobbing. The Prince knew it
was going to be difficult to calm this emotional idiot and glean information from
him. But he had a duty to do.

Murugaiyyan shared his grief with the Prince.

He had parted from his wife at Nagappattinam itself even before the
commencement of the journey. As soon as the group reached Thiruvarur he
started looking for his wife in the crowd of the people. After several hours of
search he finally found her in an alley that branched off from the main road. She
was with the mahout who drove the Prince’s elephant. As soon as the duo
entered the alley they started walking fast. Murugaiyyan followed them.

They finally stopped at the entrance of a house at the end of the alley. Another
man was waiting for them. Then all the three walked together. Murugaiyyan had
a thousand doubts in his mind. At first he even suspected the fidelity of his wife.
But he wanted to be sure. So he did not confront her at that time. He followed
her.

The three walked fast crossing the city limits, through the fields, to reach the
city’s burial ground. Murugaiyyan was shocked. But he did not go back. He hid
himself behind a tree. The person who joined the group later had smeared ash all
over his body and was chanting some mantras. And then he looked at the mahout
and roared:

“Your life will be in danger tomorrow. Be careful or else you will be dead.”

The mahout went pale.

“What danger? How will it come? How can I be careful unless I know about the
danger?”

The first person who appeared like a sorcerer said:

“The elephant will become mad. When you go near the beast it will push you
away and run away carrying the Prince. People will think that the beast went
mad because of you. They will snatch the elephant-goad from you and kill you
with that.”

“Oh My God! Is there any means of escape?”

“Yes, there is. Don’t go near the elephant tomorrow morning.”

“That is not possible. I am in His Majesty’s service. That will be considered as

dereliction of duty and I will be punished.” The mahout almost screamed.

“Don’t worry. Come to my house. I will give you an amulet loaded with magical
powers. Wear it while you report to duty. And don’t carry the goad with you.”

“Sure. Will the Prince be in danger?”

“How can I tell you? The Prince has to come to me to know the answer for that
question.”

Murugaiyyan could not stand there any longer. He came running to the Prince
mainly to warn him that the elephant was likely to go mad the next day.

Murugaiyyan finished the narration and started crying again.

“Why are you crying? You have come to me on time. You have warned me.
Don’t worry. I know how to take care of myself.”

“Your Majesty, I am shocked and ashamed that my wife is involved in all these. I
don’t know what to think of my wife. These developments have revived all my
old doubts about her.”

“Don’t worry. I’ll reform her. You may go now. Please bring the mahout to me
immediately.”

After Murugaiyyan went away the Prince was lost in thoughts. He was thinking
about the significance of what Murugaiyyan had told him. He remembered the
words of his sister warning him of the evil intentions of Pazhuvettaraiyars and
the presence of conspirators from the Pandya Kingdom. This could be the work
of the conspirators or mere foolishness of the mahout and the sorcerer. He
thought for a while and formulated a plan of action. Then he went to bed. He had
a nice sleep.

Prince Arulmozhivarman woke up pretty early in the morning and was ready for
the rest of the journey. He came to the door of the Palace. The elephant which
was tied to a pole lifted its trunk to recognize the Prince. The Prince gently
stroked the beast. He remembered the words of Murugaiyyan: “The elephant will
go mad.”

There was absolutely no sign of madness.

“Where is the mahout?”

The Prince almost shouted. Several voices echoed the words of the Prince.

The people had also got up early and were ready for the journey. The Prince saw
Murugaiyyan amongst the crowd. He was struggling to come near the Prince but
the crowd did not allow him. The Prince asked him to come. The crowd then
gave way to Murugaiyyan. He told the Prince that he found his wife late in the
night after many hours of search. She refused that she went to the burial ground.
On the top of if she blamed her husband that he had lost his mind. The mahout
was nowhere to be found.

“Never mind. Murugaiyya, release the chains from the elephant’s leg.”

As Murugaiyyan was carrying out the orders a voice was heard. “The mahout
has come.”

Many people shouted at the same time. “Yes, he has come.”

The mahout had the goad in his hand and was running towards the Prince. The
crowd gave way for him.

“Thank God” – the Prince looked at the mahout. Poor soul! One night had
changed him a lot. He was frightened. He looked pale.

The mahout approached the elephant and touched its trunk.

The elephant lifted him by its trunk and with a noisy trumpeting sound tossed
him far away. He fell about a hundred feet from the beast. The goad in his hand
had fallen farther away.

“The elephant has gone mad.” – People panicked. They started running away.

Chapter 18: Mahout Disappointed

Opportunity is a pseudonym of God” is an adage coined by a man of wisdom. If
God does something and does not want the world to know he hides behind the
word, “opportunity”. As we read the biographies of great warriors, great
achievers and saints who changed the course of history we find that they were
given the right opportunity at the right time. God was particularly kind to them
and sent those rare opportunities their way. Some would say that it all depends
on one’s stars or the time of one’s birth or the structure of their horoscope. Or
perhaps the Karmic merit bestowed on them by the God of Creation, Brahma.

If Mohandas Gandhi were not given a chance to go to South Africa he could not
have become Mahatma Gandhi, winning the hearts of millions.

Chandragupta, Vikramadithya, Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, Duke of
Willington, King George – all these great men were blessed with the right
opportunity at the right time. But it is wrong to infer that God was impartial to
these people. God has been giving opportunities to great men and ordinary
people alike; but it requires enormous intelligence, quick wits and boundless
courage to exploit those opportunities. Those who fail to take right decisions
pretty fast miss the bus and then live an ordinary lack-lustre life and leave the
world as silently as they came into it. But those who use these God-given
opportunities leave a blazing trail in the annals of history.

Let us take the case of two persons born on the same day and at the same time.
One leads a great life and becomes a national hero; while the other lives and
dies an ordinary man, one among the faceless crowd, unsung and unhonoured.
The only way we can explain this paradox is the differences in the way they used
the opportunities that came their way.

Prince Arulmozhivarman’s elephant tossed the mahout away. People started
running away from the elephant in fear. At that time a wonderful opportunity
presented itself to the Prince. If the Prince had not used it the history of
Tamilnadu would have been different. King Raja Raja Chozhan could not have
attained such great heights in history if the Prince had decided otherwise at that
time.

The Prince remembered the words of boatman Murugaiyyan. He now knew that
the person who approached the elephant was not the original mahout. He had
come with evil intentions. The elephant probably knew this instinctively and
threw him away.

There was no point in learning more about person who had come in the guise of
the mahout. If only the Prince had spent time on that he would have missed the
chance. The words “Mad Elephant” frightened and confused the people around
him. And the Prince was convinced that there could not be a better time to
escape from the crowd. His immediate mission was to free himself from those
people and reach the capital city of Thanjavur at the earliest. And he could not
hope for a better opportunity to accomplish his mission.

Prince Arulmozhivarman called Murugaiyyan and whispered something in his
ears. Then he asked him to bend down. He placed a leg on Murugaiyyan’s
shoulders and from there jumped on to the elephant. As he jumped he pushed
away the howdah which fell down on the street. He then whispered something
into the elephant’s ears. The elephant started to move as if possessed. It
trumpeted in a frightening voice as it did a little earlier and started walking fast.
After sometime it started to run.

Murugaiyyan shouted: “Oh My God! The elephant has gone mad. Run for your
lives. Right Now.”

The people were frightened even more. They scattered in all the four directions
and ran through the cross-roads and alleys. Some sought refuge in houses whose
doors were open. Even those who are otherwise bold would run fast to escape
from a mad elephant. Even the greatest of warriors, armed to the boot could not
stand before a raging, mad elephant. What could a motley crowd of lay people,
women and children, all unarmed do anything but run away from the beast?

The elephant crossed the city limits of Thiruvarur. The Prince thought fast.
Instead of directing the elephant to the main road to Thanjavur he drove it in the
northwest direction. There was no proper road in that direction.

Before being stormed by people in Nagapattinam he wanted to meet his sister
Kunthavai at Pazhaiyaarai before going to Thanjavur. The later developments
only reinforced his earlier decision.

It would be natural for a mad elephant to run helter-skelter in a random fashion.
If the elephant took the proper high road to Thanjavur people might become
suspicious. There was the added risk of people following him on the Thanjavur
road. If the elephant chose an unusual route to run away it would be impossible
for people to know where the elephant went, let alone follow him.

The Prince turned the huge beast towards northwest and made it run through
open fields, canals and breached rivers. The elephant did not mind the obstacles
or the rough terrain and ran fast towards Pazhaiyaarai.

The Prince was quite thrilled. His mind was filled with a new enthusiasm. His
heart felt like a caged bird which would shoot through the skies after it had been
set free. He knew intuitively that he was in the most crucial stage of his life. That

intuition gave him more strength and enthusiasm.

Murugaiyyan ran on the streets shouting, “The elephant has gone mad!” He ran
towards the place where the mahout was thrown away by the elephant. A little
away from the Chozha Palace of Thiruvarur was a famous pond called
Kamalalayam. Murugaiyyan went near the pond.

People who were frightened by the elephant had got into the pond. Murugaiyyan
saw a person struggling in water. He was actually swimming towards the bank.
Murugaiyyan focused his eyes on him. He was the sorcerer who was with
Rakkammal and the original mahout the previous day.

Lucky fellow, thought Murugaiyyan. For the person had survived even after
being thrown away by a furious elephant. He was the one who ran towards the
elephant with a goad in his hand. What happened to his goad? Perhaps that also
must have fallen into water, thought Murugaiyyan.

Murugaiyyan went near that man.

“Oh Mahout! Thank God you are saved. What happened to your goad?”

The person’s name was Revadasan alias Kramavithan. He glanced at
Murugaiyyan.

“What are you saying? Who are you? I took a bath in this pond. And now I am
coming out.”

“Oh! Is that so? Then you are not the mahout, right? The elephant did not throw
you away, right? Ok. Tell me where the mahout is.”

Kramavithan was shocked.

“How do I know? Why do you ask me?”

“Sorcerer, you cannot deceive me. Didn’t you take the mahout to the burial
ground and warn him about the Prince’s elephant going mad? And you forgot
your own warning and got thrown by the mad elephant. Ok that’s your problem.
Why should I bother? Tell me where is the original mahout? And where is my
wife Rakkammal?”

Kramavithan’s face went dark in fear and shock.

“Mahout? Rakkammal? What happened to you? Are you all right?”

Kramavithan was looking around.

“Yes. Yes. I too am mad like the elephant. But tell me where the mahout is.
Otherwise you had it.... “

Murugaiyyan’s voice was fierce now.

Kramavithan looked around and once he was sure there was nobody he smiled at
Murugaiyyan.

“You called me sorcerer. But any day you are a better sorcerer. You seem to
know everything. There is no point in hiding anything from you. I came running
only to warn the Prince that the elephant had gone mad. I wanted to warn the
Prince. I wanted to save him. See the reward I got for my good intentions. Your
wife and the mahout are in a house on the other side of the town. I will take you
there. I am sure the Prince is not hurt. I hope he is fine.”

“Fine, he is. He was the one who ordered me to bring you and the mahout.”

“You should get me a good reward from the Prince. Honestly I was the one who
saved his life. See there!” Kramavithan stopped talking.

In the direction he pointed out, among the bushes there was something similar to
the pointed end of a spear.

“Oh, that’s my goad.” Kramavithan ran towards the bushes. But Murugaiyyan
was faster. He reached the place before the sorcerer and got hold of that goad.

He turned around. The sorcerer was not to be seen.

“Oh my God! I lost him by my foolishness.” He ran around looking out for the
sorcerer. He could not find him. Kramavithan ran towards the crowd of people

gathered on the banks of the pond and soon disappeared.

After the elephant ran away the people returned to the Chozha Palace.
Murugaiyyan saw them coming. He did not stand there.

He strained his memory to locate the sorcerer’s house which he had seen the
previous day. He went in that direction. People were standing in groups in all the
main streets engaged in serious conversation. People who saw the running
elephant swore that they saw somebody on the top of the elephant. Others
refuted it.

“How can there be? The elephant started running soon after it threw away the
mahout. How can anybody climb up a mad elephant and that too when it is
running?”

The people were walking towards the Palace. They were anxious to know that
their beloved Prince was safe.

Murugaiyyan went in the opposite direction and reached the alley which he
crossed the previous day. The place was deserted. Everybody was on the main
roads near the Palace.

Murugaiyyan had seen the house in the night. It was difficult to identify it during
daytime. Murugaiyyan was passing slowly from house to house. One house was
apparently locked. But he heard a moaning sound coming from inside. Next to
that house was a house in ruins. Murugaiyyan entered the house in ruins,
climbed up the terrace and jumped on the backyard of the next house.

As expected he saw the mahout there. The mahout looked as if he was possessed
by some evil spirits. His hands and legs were bound. He was bound to a pillar.
The mahout was struggling to get himself free. He was trying to bite the rope
that bound him. Occasionally he stopped biting and screamed for help.

His face brightened when he saw Murugaiyyan. He had seen Murugaiyyan in
Nagappattinam. He had talked to him. He knew that Murugaiyyan was known to
the Prince.

“Murugaiyya, release me. Cut off these ropes. The devils have cheated me. Is the
Prince safe?”

Murugaiyyan briefly narrated the events of the morning while releasing him
from his bondage. He then asked the mahout to tell his side of the story. The
mahout was in a state of haze. And yet he managed to explain what had
happened to him.

They had promised to give the mahout an amulet to save him from the mad
elephant. They had taken him to his house. They burned incense. The sorcerer
was chanting something. They must have mixed some drugs in the incense. The
mahout fainted and was sleeping for a long time. And when he woke up he
found himself bound to a pillar.

The two men left the house and walked fast towards the Chozha Palace. A much
larger crowd had now gathered at the gates of the Palace. The people were
worried about the safety of the Prince. That was the only topic of discussion.
They were worried because the Prince was not to be seen. Nobody knew what
happened to the Prince. Some still maintained there was a man atop the elephant.

It could probably be the Prince. Anyhow it was a wild guess.

The Prince was well-versed in the art of training an elephant. And he knew the
elephant’s language as well. This was widely known. The Prince probably must
have ridden on the elephant to control the beast and to avoid people getting hurt.
Murugaiyyan and the original mahout reached the place gates. When the people
knew what happened to the mahout the previous night they were shocked.

The person who bound the original mahout and ran to the elephant with a goad
might have been sent by the enemies of Chozha Kingdom.

“He might have been sent by the Pazhuvettaraiyars” – That was a new insight
and many people agreed. This made them even more furious over
Pazhuvettaraiyars. With the fury still ruling their hearts they started to march
towards Thanjavur.

Some enquired about the elephant and went in the direction taken by the beast
while others started walking on the high road to Thanjavur.

Chapter 19: Thirunallam

Vanathi was clinging to her life and the detached roof of Astrologer’s house as
she was floating along the course of River Cauvery. Water was dragging her
towards the East. She moved at the speed of flowing water. Sometimes it was
very slow; and sometimes, very fast. And at times the floating roof was caught in
whirlpools and was struggling to stay afloat.

There were times when the roof was floating over shallow waters. When Vanathi
saw the trees on the banks of the river and the stone structures along the banks
and how deep they were under water she could understand the full import of the
natural calamity. When the roof was floating on shallow waters Vanathi wanted
to jump from the roof and escape to safety. But before she could put her decision
to action the roof carried her to deeper levels.

Vanathi was not in a mood to get down from the floating roof. She believed that
River Ponni (another name for River Cauvery) would take her to Ponniyin
Selvan, Prince Arulmozhivarman. She remembered the words of the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. He had hinted that the Prince’s life was in danger. The girl
naively believed that the River was taking her to her beloved so that she could
save him from the impending disaster.

Then she remembered Poonkuzhali. Oh My God! Why she was so much
interested in the Prince? Why was she taking too many liberties with Prince
Arulmozhivarman? Then another part of her mind admonished her. She has the
right. Prince Arulmozhivarman is alive today only because of her.

But the rest of her mind did not accept that logic.

No, it is not true. Poonkuzhali did not save the Prince. He is alive today thanks
to his stars, thanks to the time of his birth, as explained clearly by the Astrologer
of Kudanthai. The Prince might have to face several dangers. But nobody can
harm him. He will be safe. Sea, floods, storm and fever – these things cannot
harm a person born to rule the world. Of course there has to be somebody in the
front when the Prince is saved. Poonkuzhali is lucky enough to take that place
and the limelight that came with it. But that does not mean that the damned
woman can take liberties with the Prince.

In the midst of her turmoil Vanathi also longed for a similar chance. That
longing had been there in her heart for quite some time. She wanted to save the
Prince at least once to score against that boat-girl.

As Vanathi was being dragged along by the force of running water she turned
around to spot a boat following her. She saw a man and a woman in that boat.
She could not recognise them. The woman was rowing. It could be Poonkuzhali.
Was she coming to save her? Was she sent by Princess Kunthavai? Enough is
enough. Already the Prince is indebted to her for saving his life. Let me not be
beholden to her too.

No, I won’t let that happen. Not for my life. I will rather be drowned in floods
than being saved by that headstrong girl.

The boat was playing a chasing game with the roof Vanathi was floating on. At
times it appeared as if the boat had almost approached the roof. And then the
roof would be caught in the force of water and would go fast downstream
leaving the boat far behind. The roof was headed down south.

Vanathi had travelled a long distance. The roof had passed the southern banks of
River Cauvery and went into an area which resembled an ocean in turbulence.
Finally she sighted land at the end of that large water body. Yes, it was the bank
of River Arasalaaru. Water from River Cauvery breached the banks and had
flooded all the area in between finally to reach this river. The southern bank of
River Arasalaaru was on a higher level than all the river-banks on the way. The
floods were contained within the bank.

Vanathi saw the river-bank and the dense foliage on it. She was quite familiar
with that place. She remembered the place so vividly as if she had been there in
one of her past lives. No, no. It was not in her past life. She had visited the place
twice during this lifetime. She was probably approaching a pilgrimage centre
known as Thirunallam.

Queen Mother Sembian Madevi was interested in rebuilding the temple in that
village in stone in memory of her late lamented husband Kandaraathithar.

There was also a mansion on the banks of the river. It was for the use of the
Royal family. Once when the Queen Mother went there she took Princess
Kunthavai along. And Kunthavai took Vanathi with her.

Vanathi remembered listening to the birds singing in the gardens near the
mansion. She also remembered an incident which happened at that time. It was
etched in her memory. She could not forget it for life.

Chapter 20: The Nestlings

That happened several years ago. Vanathi had just come to Pazhaiyaarai from
her native place, Kodumbalur. She was amazed by the abundance of water in
Chozha Kingdom. There were no rivers in her place. Kodumbalur had only lakes
and ponds. These water-bodies and lakes would be full during rains. In summer
they would go dry.

Kodumbalur did not have rivers with water brimming up to the banks and
creating whirlpools and swirls in its course. Neither did Kodumbalur boast of
canals and water-ways that carried water from the river to the fields. Vanathi had
not seen gigantic ponds full of lotus and Senkazhuneer flowers in her place.

Vanathi was awed by these sights when she first landed in Chozha Kingdom.
The big lotus leaves appeared like umbrellas to the fishes swimming beneath
them. The water droplets running across these huge leaves was a sight to the
eyes. Beetles used to fly and dance around lotus and Alli flowers. Vanathi would
become ecstatic and lose all sense of time.

Once Vanathi and Kunthavai had gone to Thirunallam (now known as
Konerirajapuram) on an invitation from the Queen Mother Sembian Madevi.
They stayed in the Chozha Mansion. Princess Kunthavai and the Queen Mother
would talk endlessly about the stories of Saivite saints and the love dripping in
their divine composition. Vanathi was not exactly interested in that subject.

She was interested in listening to the songs of the birds in the garden adjoining
the mansion. She wanted to spend all her time listening to the buzz made by the
blue beetles which went around the newly blossomed lotuses in circles. On the

other side of the mansion was the flowing river. The water-flow was fast and
furious causing many swirls on the way. Vanathi liked to see the small, red
Kadamba flowers caught in those swirls. She could not dream of enjoying such
sights back home at Kodumbalur.

Once during that stay when the Queen Mother and Princess were engaged in an
animated conversation Vanathi went near them. Of course she did not want to
take part in the conversation. Kunthavai saw the face of her best friend.

“Vanathi, please go to the garden. I will join you in a few minutes.”

Vanathi ran to her favourite destination. She went around the garden for some
time. The Princess had not come. She then went to the lotus pond. There were
several tall trees on the banks of the pond. Among the trees was a wild olive tree
whose tallest branches almost reached the sky. The tree had branched in all
directions spanning a wide area. The ground beneath the tree was carpeted with
the soft wild olive flowers. The whole garden was enveloped in the fragrance
coming from those flowers. Vanathi sat on a large protruding root of the tree.
She looked around. The sweet songs of the birds reached her ears and she
became drunk in joy. She was so full of happiness that it overflowed and spread
all over her body. Vanathi had never thought that her life would be so happy.

From her vantage position she could see the river at a distance. Through the gaps
between the trees she could enjoy the beautiful scenery that always accompanied
a river in full stream.

She saw a young man swimming in the river. The water was almost red in
colour. And the man’s complexion was a kind of golden hue. She was fascinated
by the beauty of the young man’s body which was half submerged in water.

Oh My God!

Vanathi now cowered in shame.

How can I lose my mind in the physical beauty of a perfect stranger!

She grew up as a very shy and modest girl. She was quite ashamed to have
looked at the young man. But her heart would not listen to her head. In spite of
the repeated warnings her eyes moved in the direction of the handsome young
man.

Vanathi was ashamed of herself. She was angry with herself. She even thought
of leaving the place. Another event now grabbed her attention. She was
distracted by the sound of nestlings coming from a bird’s nest just above her
head. She looked up. Pity and horror filled up her mind. A few nestlings popped
up their heads from the nest. They screeched softly. But Vanathi could discern
panic in their voices. There was fear and a cry for help. At least it appeared so to
Vanathi. She then turned around to see a wild cat climbing up the tree. The feline
creature was very close to the bird’s nest.

Vanathi’s scream for help was heard afar.

“What happened?” –Vanathi could hear a voice and the sound of running steps.
Vanathi turned to look. The young man who was bathing in the river was now
running towards her.

Almost at the same time two big birds came near the nest. They must be the
parents of those pathetic nestlings. The big birds had come to save their children
from the feline predator. The birds had long noses. Vanathi recognised them as
wood peckers. While one bird went around the nest in circles the other bird flew
close to the cat attempting to drive it away with its pointed beak.

Even the parent-birds were quite small. The cat could have had a sumptuous
meal of the birds and their nestlings... And yet they were risking their lives to
save their children. Vanathi had lost her father and mother at a very young age.
She was moved to tears by the scene unfolding before her eyes.

The cat stayed there for a while and then extended its front paw towards the nest.
The leg touched the bird’s nest. Vanathi screamed again. Meanwhile the young
man had come near her. She was too shy to talk to him. She showed the bird’s
nest and the cat to the young man.

Till then the young man thought that the woman was in danger. He looked at her
and smiled again. The way he looked at her and the way he smiled melted
Vanathi’s heart. For a while she even forgot the plight of the birds.

The young man ran up to the tree and stood directly behind the bird’s nest. He
tried to shoo away the wild cat. The cat was unfazed. It looked pointedly into the
eyes of the young man and growled.

‘This cat is a real devil’ thought the young man. He picked up a stone and threw
at the cat. The stone missed its mark and hit the branch near the cat. The cat was
frightened by the missile attack. It leapt to another branch and from there to
another tree and in a few seconds vanished from the scene.

In the meanwhile the nestlings were struck by another calamity. When the cat
had tried to pull the nest by its front leg, the nest had detached from the tree.
When the stone hit the branch, the shock unsettled the nest further. The nest was
now hanging precariously ready to fall any time. And if it did, the nestlings that
just escaped from the mouth of the predator would be crushed to death by the
fall. A part of the nest still remained attached to the tree.

The parent-birds were now encircling the nest. Their cries were more pathetic
now. If the wind was a little stronger the hanging nest would fall crushing the
nestlings to death.

The young man thought fast. At first he thought of climbing the tree to save the
nest. Then he changed his mind.

He turned to Vanathi.

“Hey girl! Come here! Spread one end of your saree below the nest. And if the
nest falls hold it in your saree. I will be back in a second.”

The young man ran away.

As promised he came back in a jiffy. But this time he was not walking. He rode
on an elephant. Vanathi could guess what he was about to do. She moved away
from the place and went to the steps of the pond. She got down a few steps and
sat there. She was watching the young man from there.

The elephant stopped under the tree. The young man stood on the elephant and
from that vantage position gently lifted the bird’s nest and placed it securely in
its former position. The parent-birds screeched even more. But there was a sense
of happiness and relief in their sounds and gestures.

The young man looked around.

“Hey girl! Where are you?” He hollered.

Vanathi was overcome by shyness and remained silent. The young man got
down from the elephant and looked around.

Vanathi thought of something which tickled her. She laughed. The young man
followed the sound of her laughter.

“Why are you laughing girl? Is that a private joke? Did something happen here
that tickled you?”

When she heard the voice of the young man so close, her heart melted.
Happiness pierced through her nerve endings. She was overwhelmed by a sense
of shame. She could not look at the young man. She looked elsewhere.

“Why did you laugh, girl? Won’t you tell me the reason?”

Vanathi steeled her heart and spoke to him.

“I thought of your valour. I could not help laughing. You brought an elephant to
fight with a cat. Great!”

The young man laughed too.

“Is that just a cat? Judging from the way you screamed I thought it was a tiger.”

Vanathi had regained her normal self. She was no longer shy. She was confident
as well.

“But tell me why should one fear the tiger in Chozha Kingdom? After all we
have the tiger on our flag, right?”

The young man’s face blossomed into a beautiful smile.

“Hey girl! I am not an alien. I belong to this Chozha Kingdom. I have been on an
elephant and had been to many a battle field. Tell me who are you. Where are
you from? You talk too much, girl.”

“Hey, mahout! Give respect and take respect. Why should you bother about me?
Why are you snooping into my personal life?”

“Sorry, girl. I won’t ask again. Looks like you hail from a Royal family. Ok, let
me go. The young man climbed the steps of the pond...

Vanathi was still in a mood to tease.

“Hey Mahout! Will you let me ride the elephant along with you?”

“Sure. What will you give me?”

“You want wages? Ok, listen. I will recommend you to my uncle who is the
Chieftain of Kodumbalur. I will get you a job in our palace there. Or else I will
make you the head of the Elephant Battalion of our Kodumbalur Army.”

“Oh My God! Are you the Kodumbalur Princess?”

The smile vanished from the young man’s face. His face fell. He arched his eye
brows.

Vanathi did not miss the import of his body language.

“Do you think Kodumbalur Princess is beneath your status? Do you think that
she is not worthy enough to ride your elephant?”

“There are hundreds of elephants at the Kodumbalur stable. And there are
hundreds of mahouts too. I won’t be needed there.”

The young man walked briskly away from her. Vanathi was looking in the
direction for a long time. She expected the young man to turn at least once to
look at her. The young man did not. He climbed up the elephant and went away.

This incident was etched indelibly in Vanathi’s heart. Whenever she thought of
the handsome appearance of the mahout, his smiling face and his sweet voice,
she felt a vague sense of joy and exhilaration. When she thought of how he rode
on an elephant to save those poor nestlings she could not help laughing. She
used to laugh when she was alone. And then felt embarrassed for that shameless
act.

She also remembered the mahout’s arrogance and how his face fell when he
heard the name Kodumbalur from her. She was thinking about the mahout
almost all the time. She also felt guilty thinking about a stranger of the opposite
sex.

Meanwhile talks were rife about Prince Arulmozhivarman’s visit to Thirunallam
to see his elder sister Kunthavai. All the girls in the palace were dying to have a
glimpse of the handsome prince who was the darling of the hearts of the Chozha
people. Vanathi was no exception. But it was easier said than done. Everybody
said that the Prince had come in. But he had not yet visited the Ladies’
Chambers. Vanathi, who was by very nature shy and timid, did not want to
invent a reason to see the Prince.

She could see the Prince only on the day he left Thirunallam. Vanathi was on the
terrace. The Prince was riding an elephant. Oh My God! Vanathi could not
believe her eyes. It was only at that moment did Vanathi realise that the mahout

whom she teased and ridiculed in the garden was none other than Prince
Arulmozhivarman. She had even barked orders at him.

But was this man the Prince? She was not sure. She asked the other ladies in the
palace several times before she was convinced that the mahout she saw earlier
was the Prince. Her embarrassment knew no bounds.

Oh My God! What have I done! I offered the King of Kings, the post of head of
the elephant battalion of a small fiefdom of Kodumbalur.

At first she laughed. Then she cried. She was guilty of her outright foolishness.
She believed that the Prince’s face fell because she called him, ‘Mahout.’

He would have thought that I am a shameless country brute who knows no
manners

Vanathi became very sad. She even thought of killing herself by falling into a
river or a pond. She thought of confessing her crime to Princess Kunthavai. But
she could not bring herself to do that. Many times she started to speak. But no
words came out of her mouth.

If the Prince had told Kunthavai about the incident the latter would have
definitely asked her. Because Kunthavai did not speak about the event Vanathi
inferred that Prince Arulmozhivarman had not told her. That was about the only
consolation for her. She deferred her decision of killing herself till she could
confess her ignorance and apologize to Prince Arulmozhivarman. She could not
bring herself to do that either.

She thought that she would get an opportunity to meet the Prince once they
returned to Pazhaiyaarai. But the moment she thought of it she would hide
herself in some dark room in the Palace. Killing herself appeared to be a far
more feasible option than appearing before the Prince.

Princess Kunthavai and other girls did not know about the incident that
happened in Thirunallam. They thought, ‘Why is this girl so shy?’’ Then they
thought that shyness and timidity went together.

Vanathi also knew another reason that made Ponniyin Selvan hate her.
Everybody in the Chozha Kingdom believed that Prince Arulmozhivarman
would one day become the Emperor. Vanathi’s people back home in Kodumbalur
also shared this belief. Her father’s brother was nursing a secret desire to marry
off Vanathi to Ponniyin Selvan. Vanathi knew what was in her uncle’s mind. The
other friends of Kunthavai alluded often that Vanathi had been sent to
Pazhaiyaarai only as a part of her uncle’s grand conspiracy to marry her off to
the Prince.

At times they would even confront Vanathi with their knowledge:

“That’s the reason you never go before the Prince. Now we know your
naughtiness.”

Vanathi was deeply hurt by these words. Now Vanathi knew why the Prince’s
face fell when she told him that she was the Kodumbalur Princess.

When Vanathi’s mind was in this state of turbulence Prince Arulmozhivarman
left Pazhaiyaarai to take part in the Srilankan War. All the women living in the
palace were asked to hold the traditional oil lamp in their hand as a part of the
seeing-off ceremony for a warrior headed for war. Vanathi had to take part in that
ceremony. She wanted to see the Prince at least once before he left for the war.

Vanathi knew very well that she did not have the guts to speak to the Prince and
ask his forgiveness. She thought of using the sign language as the next best
alternative. Why couldn’t she use her eyes instead of the spoken word? That had
been her desire and longing. But reality shattered her dreams. When the Prince
came near her she fainted dropping the oil lamp on the floor. That was
considered as an ill-omen.

Vanathi recollected the events of that fateful day as she was passing Thirunallam
while riding on the roof of Astrologer’s house. She knew that Ponniyin Selvan
had a soft corner for her. He had conveyed that subtly through Princess
Kunthavai and directly to her as well.

But something blocked that ‘soft corner’ from blossoming into love. Vanathi
knew that ‘something’. Prince Arulmozhivarman thought that the Kodumbalur
Chieftain was forcing the marriage on him because people hoped that one day he
might ascend the Chozha Throne. That was downright selfish. Vanathi’s uncle –
her father’s brother – had hinted about the marriage alliance several times.

Who knows, even Princess Kunthavai might be a part of that conspiracy. Many
people believed it. Even that boat-girl Poonkuzhali hinted about Kunthavai’s role
in that conspiracy while making fun of Vanathi. No wonder the Prince knew
about the conspiracy and that thought prevented him from falling in love with
her.

But if the Prince comes to know of my terrible vow – that I will never ascend the
Chozha Throne as a Queen - the block in his mind will surely go away. The
question is how will the Prince know? Will he ever know? Why don’t I tell him on
his face? Why don’t I make it clear to him up front that I am not interested in
being a Queen? I want nothing but his love. But how am I going to talk to him?
The moment he comes before me my mouth goes dry. Even dry air refuses to
come out of my mouth let alone the spoken words... Without knowing who he was
I called him a mahout at Thirunallam. And he told me on my face that I talk too
much. After that incident I can neither see him nor talk to him.

Vanathi’s mind now admonished her:

Hey, Orphan Vanathi, if you happen to see the Prince again don’t miss the
opportunity. Tell him your love.

Tell him “Even if you ascend the Chozha Throne I won’t sit with you as your
Queen. That’s the vow I have taken. I want you as a simple mahout. Please take
me on a ride on your elephant just once. I will consider that as more precious
than staying in heaven for all eternity.”

‘That’s okay. But will I ever get a chance to speak to him? Where will these
floods take me? I may never reach the land. I may be drowned in the floods. No,
it will never happen. There in the yonder I see the river-bank. I can even see the
dome of the Chozha Mansion at Thirunallam. Aha! Looks like it was just
yesterday that the Prince rode on an elephant to save those nestlings and talked
to me.

Oh My God! What do I see there? There is an elephant. And a mahout is riding
on it. The elephant was casually walking across the flooded river. It appeared as
if a black mountain was moving across the water. Who is the one sitting

majestically on the top of the elephant? Perhaps... perhaps..... . But why should
the Prince come here and that too all alone?

Once I mistook the Prince for a mahout. Does that mean that I should look at
every mahout as a Prince? What foolishness! Ok let him be just an ordinary
mahout. He may save me from the floods. He may lift me from this roof and place
me on the bank. And if I revealed my identity, who knows, he might even take me
to Ponniyin Selvan.

Vanathi shouted “Oh Mahout! Oh Mahout! Help me. I am drowning.” Perhaps
the mahout did not hear. Or he heard and did not want to help. The elephant did
not stop. The mahout never turned to her side. The elephant started walking fast.
And within seconds the elephant and the mahout took a turn and disappeared
from her view.

Before she could recover from the disappointment she had another frightening
thought. It appeared to her that the roof had suddenly picked up momentum and
was going very fast. It was rotating as it moved forward. The huge trees and
their gigantic roots started coming perilously close to her. And if the floating
roof hit those mighty roots then it would break and would sink in water.

If that happened can I manage to reach the shore? Or will I be caught in the
whirlpool, hit the roots and die here?

Oh My God! What is this? I see a huge crocodile with its mouth wide open very
near the roots. Is it real? Or a stuffed toy? Or just a hallucination?

The floating roof came near the bank. It was a matter of seconds before it hit the

strong roots of the trees.

Vanathi closed her eyes and prayed.

“Holy Mother, Durga Parameswari! This orphan girl does not have anybody in
this world but you. Please take me to your lotus feet and give me peace.”

Chapter 21: On The Brink of Death

There are occasions in life where a fraction of a second will seem like a century.
Vanathi was precisely in one such situation at that time. She closed her eyes and
was praying to Goddess Durga Parameswari to deliver her from danger.
Meanwhile the roof on which she had been floating was caught in a swirl. This
could have lasted utmost a few seconds. But it appeared to her that a few
centuries must have passed in between. She experienced a jolt which shook the
innermost parts of her being and forced her to open her eyes. She found that the
jolt was caused by the roof hitting the strong roots of a tree on the river bank.

The roof crumbled. But fortunately at that time more than half of her body was
caught in the crooked branches of a tree. That was the reason she did not hit the
roots of the tree along with the roof. Vanathi knew her condition and clung to the
branches for her life. The swirl of water was trying to drag her back into the
river. The force of water was so great that one time Vanathi thought that her legs
would be ripped off from her body. Her saree pushed her back into the
whirlpool.

Vanathi was suddenly blessed with an extraordinary courage. She gritted her
teeth and using all her strength she climbed up a tree-branch. The branch was
weak. But soon Vanathi climbed to a higher branch which was much stronger.
She sat in a comfortable nook. She squeezed one end of her saree and drained
the water from it.

She heard the sound of water being splashed. It was only then that Vanathi
remembered the crocodile she saw before she closed her eyes.

She looked down. At first she saw the tail of the reptile splashing the water. A
large part of the reptile was covered by the broken pieces of the roof on which
she had been floating. Some of the pieces were stuck to the crocodile’s body. It
took a while for the dangerous reptile to free its body from the sticking pieces of
the roof. Perhaps to celebrate its newfound freedom the crocodile opened its big
mouth wide and turned towards Vanathi as if to say, “Come here. Your destiny
ends here in my mouth.”

Vanathi was happy. She was also in a mood to celebrate her newfound freedom.
After all she had come out of water. She spoke to crocodile in a sarcastic voice.

“Oh, you want me inside your mouth? You want to swallow me? No way. You
can’t do anything, either with your limbs or with your tail. There is no point in
baring your ugly teeth to me. I am not going to be your food. You may have to
look elsewhere for your lunch.”

The crocodile continued to stare at her.

“Oh, you still want to eat me?” Vanathi looked around. She then realised that she
was in a very precarious position. The branches of the tree tilted dangerously
towards the river. If Vanathi climbed down the trunk of the tree she would have
to face the crocodile which was lying on the roots. If she jumped through the
branches that slanted towards the river she would be caught in the whirlpool
once again. She could not even bear to look at the swirling water even from a
safe distance. She became dizzy. The branches that were on the river-bank side
were well above the ground. But Vanathi had no other option. She had to jump
from a tall branch if she wanted to live.

She had been in water for a long time. Her legs had become very cold. When she
tried to stand her legs trembled.

Vanathi cursed her weak, trembling legs and abandoned her attempt to stand.
And then started the final trial of patience. Who would last longer? Vanathi or
the crocodile? Perhaps the time was ideal to test that hypothesis.

She was shocked to hear the trumpeting sound of an elephant. She saw an
elephant walking towards her. It was the same elephant which had crossed the
river a little while ago and went west. At the same time Vanathi saw a boat
coming towards her.

Oh My God! Vanathi almost shouted. For in the boat were Poonkuzhali and the
Astrologer’s disciple. At last Poonkuzhali had to come to rescue her. Vanathi
cursed her fate.

The boat moved into a place beneath the tree. Meanwhile Poonkuzhali spotted
Vanathi sitting on the tree branch. She smiled at her.

“Princess! What a place you have chosen to hide! Come down. Fast. Do you
know who is coming there riding an elephant?”

Vanathi immediately knew who the person was. But she wanted a confirmation.

“I don’t know. Who is he?”

“Didn’t you go searching for somebody? Well, he is the one. The Prince.”

Vanathi could not contain her surprise. She looked at the person riding the
elephant. She did not want to be sitting on the tree-branch when the Prince saw
her. She wanted to get into the boat along with Poonkuzhali. She looked down.

The water was so forceful that the boat could not remain stationary beneath the
tree. It started to drift away. Poonkuzhali jumped into the water to rescue Vanathi
from the tree.

Oh My God! Vanathi shrieked. Didn’t she see the huge crocodile under the tree?
A thousand thoughts flashed across her mind. She tried to warn Poonkuzhali. But
she was not coherent.

Vanathi screamed. And Poonkuzhali heard the word “Crocodile”. She turned to
look. Poonkuzhali went pale on seeing a gigantic reptile with its mouth wide
open very close to her. When Poonkuzhali saw the reptile it hit the water with its
tail.

Poonkuzhali was no coward. She had been in many dangerous situations in her
life and had managed to come out of them all unscathed. And yet what could she
do with just her mental courage to escape from a crocodile which was hardly ten
feet away from her? One wrong move on her side, she would be finished. And if
she did not do anything during the next few seconds then she would end in the
reptile’s stomach. How could she escape? The only way was to get back into the
boat.

Poonkuzhali sprang into water. The boat had drifted away from her. The
astrologer’s disciple knew that he could not park the boat in the swirl. He
decided to move away further east and reach the bank there. He had no way of

knowing that Poonkuzhali was in danger. As Poonkuzhali was swimming
furiously towards the boat she realised that swimming in a whirlpool near the
bank in River Cauvery was a hundred times more hazardous than swimming in
the mighty ocean near Kodikkarai. The swirl was trying to pull her down. She
realised that the crocodile had now started moving towards her. One end of her
saree was now caught in the tree-branch which made her condition even more
dangerous.

Sitting safely on the tree branch Vanathi saw Poonkuzhali’s plight.
Poonkuzhali’s hatred towards her, her caustic words which led her to take a
terrible vow, Vanathi not wanting to be saved by Poonkuzhali and her falling
back in water.. . all these things flashed across her mind. At the same time she
also remembered how Poonkuzhali saved the Prince from the brink of death and
took him safely to the Choodamani Monastery. Not only Vanathi but the entire
Chozha Kingdom was indebted to that boat-girl for that act of kindness and
bravery. And the Prince is coming on an elephant in the yonder. And if this girl
was killed by the crocodile before he comes here..... Oh My God... his heart
would bleed for her. Again Poonkuzhali was now fighting for her life for the
only reason that she came here to save Vanathi.

It might take some time to transcribe her thoughts to words. But these thoughts
crossed her mind faster than the speed of light. In fact nothing moved faster than
the thoughts – not even light. Vanathi was now clear as to what was her first duty
at that time. She stepped down into a lower branch. She almost flattened down
on the branch and extended her hands towards Poonkuzhali. She held
Poonkuzhali’s long hair. Poonkuzhali looked up. She did not try to free herself
from Vanathi’s grip. Poonkuzhali now extended her hand towards Vanathi which
she held tight. Vanathi now tried to pull Poonkuzhali up. Poonkuzhali used her
other had to grab a branch and came above the water level. She was trying to get
into the same branch as Vanathi. The branch could not bear the weight of two
women. It bent down. Poonkuzhali was still trying to climb up. In that attempt
her legs wavered. The very next second Poonkuzhali was hanging between the
branch and the water below. Vanathi’s two hands were firmly gripping
Poonkuzhali’s hand.

The crocodile took some time to come out of the tangle of the tree-roots. It was
now out in the open. It saw Poonkuzhali hanging from the tree. The reptile
opened its mouth wide and started moving towards her. Poonkuzhali was now on
the brink of death.

Vanathi’s soft hands could not bear the strong body of Poonkuzhali for long. At
one time Vanathi felt that her hands would get detached from her body and fall
down the river along with Poonkuzhali. And if Poonkuzhali fell down she would
land right into the open mouth of the crocodile.

If that happened then Vanathi could not look at the face of her beloved Prince
again in her life. And if Poonkuzhali fell down she would also fall with her. That
seemed to be the only viable alternative at that moment.

Meanwhile the elephant had come near. The Prince was sure to save
Poonkuzhali from the jaws of death. But would Vanathi’s hands have the
strength to hold Poonkuzhali till such time? The elephant came to the river bank
and stopped under the tree. It trumpeted once again. The crocodile was distracted
by the sound. It looked at the pachyderm. And then it retreated to its place in the
middle of the exposed roots of the tree.

Vanathi still seated on the tree branch bent down and looked at the elephant. She
also saw the rider. Yes, it was the Prince. Prince Arulmozhivarman. Ponniyin
Selvan.

“Oh Mahout! Mahout! Didn’t you save the nestlings of a bird the other day?
Why don’t you save this poor girl now? Please.”

Vanathi spoke in a voice which only she could hear.

No, this was the limit, thought Vanathi. She could not bear the girl any longer.
Even if she delayed a second more her hands would come off her shoulders.

‘Oh My God! This girl is named Poonkuzhali. Which means a flower. But her
weight is enormous. Looks like her body is made of solid steel.’

‘Mahout! Mahout! Won’t you come soon?’

Poonkuzhali screamed. Vanathi feared the worst. She was sure that the crocodile
had got her. She could not bear to see the horrible sight. She closed her eyes.

Vanathi could feel somebody pulling Poonkuzhali from her. It seemed that
Poonkuzhali’s weight was increasing. Vanathi tightened her grip on the boat-girl
and tried to lift her up.

“Vanathi! Please let her go.”

All the sweetness in the world passed through her ears. Yes it was the sweet
voice of her beloved, the Prince. Vanathi did not know what she was doing. She
just let Poonkuzhali go out of her hand. She could feel an immense sense of
relief on her shoulders. She opened her eyes.

The elephant had lifted Poonkuzhali and was gently placing her on the river
bank. Poonkuzhali’s eyes were closed. She must have screamed when the
elephant’s trunk went round her body to lift her up.

Vanathi remembered a similar situation in her life; she too had screamed and
fainted when an elephant lifted her. Bur now the situation was several times
more alarming and yet Vanathi did not lose her cool. She was fully conscious
and she was surprised of her own courage.

Vanathi missed Princess Kunthavai. If only she were in the scene she would have
praised Vanathi’s courage and determination. Vanathi then consoled herself.
Kunthavai would come to know of this event sooner or later.

‘But what is my position now? Now that Poonkuzhali has been lifted by the
Prince’s elephant, will I be left here on the top of this tree to fend for myself? If
the Prince were to abandon me here it will be the right punishment for my
foolishness. No it can’t be. The Prince will never have the heart to leave me
alone.’

The elephant’s trunk now reached Vanathi. Vanathi closed her eyes. The next
second she was lifted from the tree and placed on firm ground. When she opened
her eyes she found herself standing by the side of Poonkuzhali on the river bank.

Without her knowing Vanathi’s heart went out to the boat girl. Her heart was full
of love for the girl. She hugged Poonkuzhali.

Poonkuzhali was in tears and spoke in a choked voice.

“Princess, you saved my life today. I came to save you from the floods. But
instead you saved me from the crocodile. You saved me from the brink of death.
I shall never forget this so long as I shall live.”

“Poonkuzhali, did I save you? No. Not at all. We both were saved by that
Mahout. You should thank him and not me.”

“I am not very keen to live, Princess. But my aunt has given me a secret message
to be passed on to her son. I did not want to die before delivering that message.”

Vanathi lifted her head and boldly looked at the person riding on the elephant.
She was in a mood for mischief.

“Mahout! Will you please take us with you for a ride on your elephant?”

She laughed at her own joke.

Chapter 22: Joy And Sorrow

Prince Arulmozhivarman heard Vanathi’s words laced with mischievous
laughter. He got down from the elephant with a smile.

“Hey girl! Do you think getting on an elephant is easy? It is as difficult as
ascending the Royal throne. To get on an elephant is difficult. To remain there is
more difficult. But the most difficult thing is getting down. At times one has to
undergo all this suffering!”

“The beauty is that some undergo that suffering for the silliest of reasons. I know
persons who come riding on an elephant to save a few nestlings.”

“Oh Vanathi, do you still remember that? You never talked about that. I thought
you forgot it.”

“Warriors who go around the world busy doing heroic deeds might forget that.
But a silly girl living in a palace has nothing more worthwhile to do than
remembering that incident. I remember your riding on the elephant on that day. I
also remember how your face fell when you came to know that I am from
Kodumbalur.”

“At that time there was a reason for that, Vanathi.”

“That reason is there even now. You are the son of an Emperor. You are the

darling of the Chozha People. You are the one and only Ponniyin Selvan. Me? I
am just an ordinary girl born in a dry forest region. I am the daughter of a
Chieftain. My father died in a battle and I am now an orphan girl. I have nobody
in this world now.”

“Vanathi, that is not fair. What you speak is not just. Ok I have to let it go for
now. I have to rush to Thanjavur now. Tell me fast. How did you come here?
Why are you alone? I heard that you floated on the roof of a house? How did this
girl come here? How was she caught in this crisis?”

Poonkuzhali intervened.

“I am happy that you remembered me at last, Prince. If you give me a minute’s
time I will tell you what I have to tell and go my way, never to return.”

The two women were standing right before the Prince and yet for some reason
they were unusually bold. They were also skilful in choosing powerful ways of
expressing their feelings.

“Samudrakumari, do you think I have forgotten you? How can I ever forget you?
I have been calling you several times. You did not hear me or chose not to listen
to me and were furiously rowing your boat. I could not forget for my life how
you were hanging between the tree-branches and the mouth of the crocodile.”

The Prince laughed.

“Nor could I forget the plight of Vanathi who was trying to hold you mustering
all her strength. But I am surprised how you two happened to come to this place.
Can one of you give me a brief account?”

Vanathi took up the offer.

“Prince, Your dear sister and I came only to block you on your way to
Thanjavur. Princess Kunthavai feels that if you enter Thanjavur at this time there
will be a big civil war. She wants to talk to you before you go into city.”

“Where is she?”

“At Kundanthai.”

“Then how are you here all by yourself?”

“On the way we stayed in the Kudanthai Astrologer’s place. At that time River
Cauvery overflowed its banks and the astrologer’s house was washed away by
the floods. Prince, people say that Mother Cauvery saved your life when you fell
into the River. I know your love for this river. But see what happened today! The
suffering of people in towns and villages, the plight of animals... oh my God...
it’s heart-rending Prince. I am tempted to call Mother Cauvery a very cruel
woman.”

“Vanathi, please do not blame her. Mother Cauvery loves our Chozha Kingdom
very much. At times when her love crosses all bounds she breaches her banks

and goes out to reach her beloved people. People who do not know about her
love blame her. When the Sea-king, the Samudrarajan, comes into the city,
crossing the shore, people blame the sea. But I am sure this Poonkuzhali would
never blame the Sea-King.”

“Please forgive me, Prince. I won’t blame the River anymore. Ok, let’s have it
your way. When your sister and I were in the Astrologer’s house Cauvery’s love
for us crossed all bounds. Your sister and others ran to the temple and got into
the Mandapam. I was foolish. I slipped down into water while climbing up. I
clung to the roof of the Astrologer’s house and have been floating all the way up
to here.”

“I think Poonkuzhali came to save you. That is wonderful! At last the king of
elephants, my Gajendran had to save you both. I can’t help appreciating the
intelligence of this elephant. He lifted you gently as if he were lifting a garland
of flowers and dropped you gently on the bank without hurting you. You know
what this same elephant did today morning? The mahout was late. He came
running towards the beast with a goad in his hand. The elephant lifted him with
its trunk and tossed him far away. I don’t know whether he is alive or dead.”

“Oh My God! I wanted to ask you about that.”

“About what?”

“Whether you were hurt by the mahout or by his goad?”

“I was about to be. But how did you know? Did the astrologer tell you? Is
Princess Kunthavai still addicted to astrology?”

“No, the astrologer did not say anything. Even if he did we would not have
believed him. The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar told us.”

“What? Who?”

“Yes, Prince. Our Chancellor, the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar told us this morning.
He barged into the Astrologer’s house when we were consulting him. He told us
about the threats to your life. He also told us about the poisoned goad.”

“I am surprised. How did he know? Perhaps he too has become an astrologer. Or
was he behind all these, as everybody is saying?”

“No, Prince. He did not do anything. He overhead the conspirators from Pandya
Kingdom.”

“I see. Did he tell anything else?”

“He did. I shudder to repeat his words. I am afraid even to think about it. He said
that the conspirators had planned to kill you, your father and the Crown Prince
on the same day. He has rushed to Kadambur to save the Crown Prince. He
wanted the Princess to warn you and the Emperor.”

“Oh My God! Since his warning has become true in my case it ought to be true
for the other two as well. Samudrakumari, didn’t you want to say something?”

“Yes, Prince. The Mute Queen of Lanka wanted me to bring you to Thanjavur
Palace immediately.”

“I almost forgot. I came running here only for her. I heard that somebody
forcibly took her to Thanjavur. Is it true?”

“It is, Prince. But it was done by our Chief Minister with good intentions.”

“Oh, that’s his work! I am sure he would have wanted to take her to my father.
Poonkuzhali, did the Minister’s plan succeed? Did the Emperor meet the Lankan
Queen?”

“They did, Prince.”

“My life’s mission is accomplished. I can’t think of anything happier than that.
So long as my mother, the Lankan Queen, is by my father’s side he will be safe.
Poonkuzhali, you know that the blessed lady is a clairvoyant.”

“Yes, Prince. I know. So long as she is there the Emperor is safe. But... “

“What, Poonkuzhali? What but.... I am frightened.... “

“I don’t know how to say this, Prince. I am lost for words. The Lankan Queen

believes that she is going to die soon. And she wants to see you before she dies.”

“OH MY GOD! Just a few seconds ago you gave me happy news. And now this
devastating news. I can’t delay even for a second. Vanathi, please ask the
Princess to forgive me. I have to go.”

Chapter 23: The Arrival of The Armies

It was a momentous day for the capital city of Thanjavur. The excited subjects
had even forgotten havoc wrought by the storm and the floods a few days ago.

‘The Most Valiant Warrior who won over Srilanka and the One who won over
the hearts of the people of Chozha Kingdom and the one and only Ponniyin
Selvan emerged out of his hiding on the day of storm at Nagapattinam. He is
now coming towards Thanjavur. He is followed by a great crowd of people, who
are determined to crown him the King.’

News like these first came as rumours. Then they were confirmed by those who
personally saw the Prince at Nagapattinam. This caused a storm in the minds of
the people of the capital city, a storm whose intensity was no less than the storm
that raged across the Kingdom a few days ago.

The people of Thanjavur decided to give a rousing reception to the Prince, on a
scale hitherto unknown in the capital city. They first started to decorate the
streets outside the Fort. They gathered on the streets and started talking about the
Prince. Drums and other percussion instruments usually played while welcoming
a King were gathered. Singers and dancers were anxious to demonstrate their
skills on the grand occasion. Women and children were exploring ways to

decorate themselves for the historical occasion.

Some restless people who could not bear to wait till the Prince reached the city
gates went out of the city and waited on the roads that led to the capital city.
Others made fun of those people.

Inside the Fort there were unmistakable signs that something important and
something unprecedented was going to happen soon.

The gates of the Fort were open early in the morning at the usual time. Vegetable
vendors, milk-vendors and the staff of the Palaces were getting into the Fort as
usual. There were only a very few people who had come to report their losses
caused by the recent floods. The King’s Bodyguards, the Velakkara Padai,
entered the Fort at the usual time.

Suddenly the massive gates of the Fort were closed shut. The gates were secured
by massive bolts and gigantic locks. Those who sought to enter the Fort
thereafter were stopped at the gates. People were wondering why the gates were
closed so early in the morning.

The Fort was secured by a moat that went along its perimeter. There was a small
bridge to cross the moat to reach the gates. The bridge was lifted up thus sealing
all the possible ways to enter the Fort. People could not even go near the gates.

People who were near the main northern entrance of the Fort enquired about the
western and southern gates. When they knew that those entrances were also
sealed and the bridges leading to them lifted up they were worried.

“What is happening here? There is no news about an enemy army invading the
Fort. As a matter of fact there are no enemies who can invade the Chozha
Empire either in the north or south, the east or west. Even assuming that the
enemies may rush from the Twin Provinces from the north they will have to
cross the Cauvery, the Coleroon and other rivers before reaching here. How can
they cross those rivers now, when they are in spate?”

This became the only subject of conversation for those living outside the Fort.

“Perhaps all these steps are only to prevent Ponniyin Selvan from entering the
Fort” some hazarded a guess.

“Must be so.” Others confirmed.

When this rumour spread across the city the people became agitated.

“Who the hell are these damned Pazhuvettaraiyars to prevent the Chozha Prince,
a descendant of the great Vijayaalaya Chozhan, from entering the Chozha Fort?
If Pazhuvettaraiyars did anything of that sort then we shall not think twice to
destroy the Fort.” There were vociferous supporters for the Prince.

Nobody could tell how a rumour is born and how it spreads so fast like a wild
fire.

Another terrible rumour was doing rounds that fateful day. That the Emperor’s

death which had been expected for a long time had just happened. At first people
asked, ‘Is it true that the Emperor died this morning?’ Then others started giving
proof.

Some people had seen the comet falling down from the sky in the wee hours of
morning. They used that astronomical event to confirm that baseless rumour.

“If it is true... what’s the next step?” – Concerned people raised the question.

‘Will there be a fight for succession? Will the Chieftains divide themselves into
two factions and fight against each other? Will these internal disturbances
threaten the stability of the Chozha Empire? And will that make the Empire
which had been flourishing for more than a hundred years vulnerable to enemy’s
invasion?’

As an animated discussion was going on somebody shouted: “Look there. An
army is coming.”

Everybody ran to the spot. Some climbed up the tall trees and tall buildings to
have a glimpse of what was happening. They were shocked by what they saw.

Three roads went out of the capital city of Thanjavur towards the western and
south-western directions. One led to Rameswaram via Kodumbalur. Another
went to Madurai and other places in the south of Pandya Kingdom. The third,
longer and broader than the other two, went to Uraiyur and from there to the
Chera Kingdom.

People were surprised to see armies marching on all the three roads that led to
Thanjavur. People could see only the front portion of the army; they could not
see where the army lines ended. The armies were quite huge.

Thankfully large banners depicting the Chozha insignia, the Tiger, were being
held by the standard bearers. People heaved a sigh of relief that the armies were
not after all alien. They were part of the Chozha Kingdom. But why should they
come now? And from where?

When these armies came nearer people could see the insignia on their flags
besides the large tiger symbol. Reading these insignia people found out that one
of the armies was the Paranthaka Chozha Regiment controlled by the
Kodumbalur Chieftain. Another was the Kaikkola Regiment from the Southern
Pandya Kingdom. The third was the Arinchaya Chozha Regiment that was
fighting the great Lankan War.

A little later it was clear that these armies were led by the great General of the
Southern Command, Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari. Now everybody knew why the
armies were coming. It was an open secret that Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari, who
was also the Chieftain of Kodumbalur, wanted to marry off his brother’s
daughter Vanathi to Ponniyin Selvan and then make him the Emperor.

What a perfect timing, thought the people. The Prince was coming with crowd of
people from the east. And the General was coming with armies from the South.
If they joined hands anything could happen.

People knew that the Pazhuvettaraiyars and the Chieftains who owed allegiance
to them wanted to see Madhuranthakan crowned as the next Emperor. The
General of the Southern Command was coming with his army only to frustrate
the plans of Pazhuvettaraiyars and make Ponniyin Selvan the next King. As that

was what the people wanted they became excited on seeing the General and his
massive army. The people got ready to welcome the armies and host a grand
feast in their honour.

Those were the days before the concept of commercial hotels. There were of
course huge choultries managed by groups of wealthy merchants. Some of the
largest choultries were managed by associations like Kodumbalur
Manigramathar, The Valanchiar of Thiruppurambayam, Uraiyur Merchants
Federation and The Association of 1500 Merchants. These choultries must have
been informed about the arrival of the armies. They were in a state of readiness
to provide food to thousands of people.

People were thrilled. They went around speaking openly what was there in their
minds. Since they all supported the side of Prince Arulmozhivarman there was
no need to keep down their voice or talk in whispers. When the soldiers started
erecting their tents the city people went to them and started engaging them in
animated conversation about the politics in Chozha King’s family.

Before darkness set in three of the four exits from Thanjavur were sealed by
armed forces. The forth one was ignored because River Vadavaaru went along
the Fort and the river was in spate. Nobody could use that route. The General
thought it was not necessary to seal that exit.

The main entrance to the Fort was in the north. It was through this entrance that
Vandhiya Thevan first entered the Fort following Nandini. The General of the
Southern Command, Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari, had his camping site very close to
the main entrance. From his tent one could see what happened at the gates of the
Fort.

It was dark. The General surveyed the Fort and returned to his camp. Hundreds

of people were already assembled near his tent. There were captains of all the
three regiments of the army. Along with them there were head of the federations
of traders.

There were leaders of The Association of 1500 Merchants, a powerful
association of traders which was world-famous in those days. They were leading
exporters and importers who had trade-connections with merchants all over the
world.

These federations were so powerful that they used to build their own war-ships
to protect their merchandise on high seas.

Apart from them the members of the five city councils of Thanjavur and other
administrative councils of the city had been invited to the assembly.

Chapter 24: The Assembly

The General of the Southern Command Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari who was also
the Chieftain of Kodumbalur greeted the dignitaries who had assembled in
response to his invitation. He then started addressing the gathering in a majestic
voice.

“Almost all of whom I had invited for this assembly have come. Thirukkovilur
Malaiyaman, the old lion, has not come. I am sure there is some strong reason
for his absence.

We have gathered here to deliberate on an act which many consider dangerous.

The whole world knows our devotion and loyalty to the Chozha clan, in
particular to the reigning monarch, Sundara Chozhan. We have demonstrated
our loyalty to the reigning monarch on many an occasion. But today our enemies
can level a grave charge against us that we have gathered here against the wishes
of our Emperor. They might even say that we have gathered to rebel against our
Emperor.

But the fact remains that we cannot meet the Emperor in private. We cannot have
a private audience with the Emperor to know what is there in his mind. Everyone
assembled here knows this. We are told that the Emperor is kept inside the
Thanjavur Fort because of his ill-health. But I strongly feel that the Emperor is
held as a hostage by the Pazhuvettaraiyars. I don’t know what you think of this
piquant situation.”

The General’s pause at this juncture was quite strategic.

“Yes, yes.”

“You are right.”

“It’s true that the Emperor is imprisoned by them.”

Several voices supported the statement of the General.

“From your enthusiastic response it is clear that all of us gathered here have a
single mission. Beginning from the time of Vijayaalaya Chozha thousands and
thousands of Chozha soldiers have laid down their lives to bring the Empire to
the present state of glory. Our heart swells in pride when we proclaim our
allegiance to this mighty Chozha Empire. We have assembled here only to save
the Chozha clan and the mighty Chozha Empire from disaster. We are not
assembled to conspire against our Emperor. That is and that can never be our
wish.

Our Emperor is held as a prisoner by his enemies for the past three years. The
enemies cite the Emperor’s ill-health as a reason for their actions. The great
Vijayaalaya Chozhan who bore 96 wounds on his blessed body entered the battle
field at Thiruppurambayam at the ripe old age of 80 wielding a sword on each of
his hand and massacred the enemy forces, leaving behind him a mountain of the
severed heads of the enemies.

Our Emperor Sundara Chozhan hails from such a valiant clan. So we find it
difficult to believe that Emperor does not want to step out of the Palace because
of his illness. I strongly suspect that the traitors who are holding our Emperor as
a prisoner have cast an evil spell on him robbing him of the powers of coherent
thinking. Let us assume for a moment that our Emperor has not lost his mind.
Will any sensible father abandon his two valiant sons, who are no less than the
Pandava Brothers, Bheema and Arjuna and prefer Madhuranthakan who has not
seen a battlefield, not even once in his life?”

“How can we be sure that it is the wish of the Emperor?”

Several voices raised in chorus.

“We do not know. It could possibly be a story concocted by the treacherous
Pazhuvettaraiyars. But even our Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar known
for his wisdom believes that.”

“He might have joined the other side. Who knows?”

Somebody in the assembly shouted.

“May be. Today our mission is to know the truth. You might be aware of the
rumour on the Emperor’s health that is doing rounds in the capital city today.
Honestly I don’t believe it. I am sure we will have the privilege of seeing our
beloved Emperor in person. When we meet him we shall find out what is in his
mind regarding the succession to the Chozha Throne. Suppose the Emperor
himself wants to crown Madhuranthakan as his successor will you agree to it?”

“NOT AT ALL!”

“NEVER!”

The whole assembly erupted.

"I won’t agree either. Because if the Emperor has his mental faculties intact he
would never nominate Madhuranthakan as his successor. The issue of the future
succession to the Chozha throne was settled during the lifetime of Emperor
Paranthaka Chozhan. I was present when Emperor Paranthaka Chozhan died. I
heard his dying declaration with my own ears. He proclaimed that thereafter
Emperor Sundara Chozhan and his heirs alone should ascend the Chozha
Throne.

I am sure there will be many in this assembly who might have heard his last
words. Kandaraathithar, the saint in the form of a King, wanted to bring up his
son as a saint. We also know that his blessed wife, the saintly Queen Mother
Sembianmadevi is quite adamant that her son should not succeed the Emperor.
There has to be a very strong reason for the Queen Mother’s stand. In these
circumstances why should our Emperor want to crown Madhuranthakan?

I will give another reason to show that he has lost his mind. After killing the
Pandya King Veerapandiyan and after crushing the Pandya army my brother
invaded Lanka to teach the Lankan King a lesson he will not forget for his life.
We failed to provide him with enough men and ammunition. And that was the
reason he died on the war front.

His death at the battle field in Lanka was a blot in the history of our great
Empire. Ponniyin Selvan and I went to Lanka to clear our name and show to the
whole world that Chozha Army is any day mightier than the Lankan army.

We destroyed the Lankan forces. We captured Anuradhapura. We drove the
Lankan King Mahindan to the hills. You all know that the Chancellor, the Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar did not extend full co-operation to us. The leaders of trade
associations helped us by sending food and supplies to our Army stationed in
Lanka. In spite of that our soldiers had to undergo a great ordeal at the Lankan
soil. Our brave warriors put up with all the troubles and defeated the army of
Mahinda. What made them do it? What gave them the motivation? It was all
because of the enthusiastic leadership of the greatest of the Chozha warriors, the
one and only Ponniyin Selvan.

Any father would have given the whole country on a platter to such a valiant
son. What did our Emperor gift to his great son? He was accused of sedition. A
group of men were sent to arrest the Prince and bring him back to our country.
Will anybody in his senses issue an order like that?”

Amember of the assembly spoke.

“General, you say that it is the Emperor’s command. Where is the proof for
that?”

“You are right. There is no proof. When we meet the Emperor today we will ask
him directly. That’s a part of our mission today. If the order had been issued
without the consent of the Emperor then think of the despicable state the country
is in. Think what happened after the arrest orders were issued. The soldiers sent
to arrest the Prince refused to obey the orders. The Prince offered himself to the
hands of law. He boarded Parthibendran’s ship and sailed to our country. They

now tell us that the ship was caught in a storm. And there was a rumour that the
Prince was drowned. I never believed that nonsense. The Sea-King would have
never snatched the life of our Prince who was once saved by Mother Cauvery.
And it was because of that he came to be known as Ponniyin Selvan. When
everybody else in his ship was saved how could he alone have drowned?

I presume that there was a plan to imprison the Prince once he reached the shore.
The Prince must have known that and would have escaped his captors. I was
sure he was hiding in a safe place and will reveal himself at the right time. I
know many of you shared my belief. Our hopes were not belied. On the day of
the storm at the coastal town of Nagapattinam our Prince came out of his hiding.
We also learnt that thousands of people were bringing him ceremoniously to the
capital city with all the fanfare. We all came here to show our support to those
people. But the bloody traitors have frustrated our plans.”

“OH MY GOD! WHAT HAPPENED?”

There were many voices of concern.

“News came to me a few minutes before we started this assembly. When our
Prince was about to leave Thiruvarur this morning his elephant suddenly became
mad and threw away the mahout. The mad elephant ran away. In the resulting
pandemonium our Prince was nowhere to be seen.”

“Oh My God!”

“Even God supports evil?”

“Has God too joined the other side?”

Many people screamed. The General asked them to be silent and continued his
speech.

“When I first heard the news I too was shocked. I somehow gathered myself and
have come to be with you. Our Prince Arulmozhivarman is as much intelligent
as he is valiant in the battlefield. He can’t be easily trapped by those damned
traitors. I hope to hear good news about him very soon. In the meanwhile I want
to know your views on what we should do now.”

After the General finished his speech others started to speak. Their views were
similar on all the major issues. The differences were only in the details. The
assembly was unanimous that its representatives should be granted private
audience with the Emperor the next day. And if granted, the representatives
should make it abundantly clear to the Emperor that they were not in favour of
Madhuranthakan ascending the Chozha Throne.

Either the Pazhuvettaraiyars should be removed from their powerful posts or the
Emperor should relocate to Pazhaiyaarai.

Adithya Karikalan had already been made the Crown Prince. Naturally he was
the one who should succeed the Emperor. In case Karikalan did not want to be
the King then the throne should naturally pass on to his brother Prince
Arulmozhivarman. Nobody else should be considered for the King’s post.

And if they were denied the chance to meet the Emperor, if the Pazhuvettaraiyars
refuse to open the gates of the Fort then they would have to lay siege to the Fort.

“There is no need to lay a siege. Let our soldiers break open the gates and raze
down the walls of the Fort.”

Some thought it would be prudent to wait till they received news about Prince
Arulmozhivarman. Others wanted to send word to the Crown Prince Adithya
Karikalan whose presence in their midst would add merit to their claim.

Others had different views.

“What is the point in waiting? The army under the direct command of
Pazhuvettaraiyars is on the other side of River Coleroon. Presently River
Coleroon and other rivers are in spate. The army cannot come here now. This is
the right time to knock down the Fort and release our Emperor from the clutches
of Pazhuvettaraiyars.”

While the discussion continued a sentry approached the General and whispered
something into his ears.

“Let the talks continue. I will be back in a minute.”

The General rushed out of his tent.

Chapter 25: At The Gates of The Fort

The General of Southern Command, Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari, walked out of the
assembly venue. He mounted the horse that was standing outside his tent. He
rode fast towards the main northern gate of the Fort. He saw an elephant walking
towards the Fort. On the top of the elephant were a mahout and two women.

The mahout had a pipe like instrument in his hand. He blew the pipe. And then
he announced in a high-pitched voice. The words were very clear.

“Hail the darling daughter of the Junior Velar of Kodumbalur, Vanathi Devi. Hail
the only daughter of the Warrior who laid down his life in the Lankan War. Hail
the foster daughter of the General of the Southern Command Bhoothi Vikrama
Kesari. Hail the dearest friend of Princess Kunthavai! Hail the One and Only
Vanathi Devi. Parak! Parak! Please give way to Vanathi Devi! Parak! Parak!

When the elephant reached the banks of the moat near the Fort he blew his pipe
again. And before its echo died down he announced in a shrill voice:

“Vanathi, the Princess of Kodumbalur Chiefdom has brought a message from
Princess Kunthavai to the Emperor! Princess Vanathi has brought a message
from the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar to his brother Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Open
the gates of the Fort to let her in. Parak! Parak! Please give way to the
Kodumbalur Princess Vanathi Devi and her dear friend Poonkuzhali! Open the
gates of the Fort and receive them.”

The General was surprised. He also faintly remembered having heard his voice

earlier.

Who is he? Let him be anybody. Who cares? Let me first make sure that Vanathi
is there on the elephant. And if it is really her I have to stop her from going in. In
a way it will be better if it is Vanathi. I can keep my child with me till these issues
are settled.

The General rode fast and reached the elephant. A few soldiers had been
following him for providing security. One of the soldiers was holding a torch in
his hand. The General examined the women passengers on the elephant with the
help of the torch. He was sure that they were Vanathi and Poonkuzhali.

“Vanathi, my dear child!” The General wanted to say something. Before that the
mahout blew his pipe once again. How was he going to stop him? Fortunately
for him the women on the elephant looked at the person riding the horse. Vanathi
said something to the mahout who stopped his pipe-playing and high-pitched
announcements.

“Is that you, Periappa? Then whatever I heard was true.”

“Yes, my child. It’s me. But what is this? Do you have to carry the message
yourself? And that too in these circumstances? Couldn’t Prince Kunthavai find
somebody else to do this risky job? “

“Yes, Periappa. Princess Kunthavai sent me as the messenger precisely because
of these peculiar circumstances. She got the news that you have surrounded the
Thanjavur Fort with a massive army. If somebody else had brought this message
your soldiers might block the messenger. Even if you let the messenger go, those

inside the Fort might refuse to open the gates. If I am the messenger both the
problems are solved. She has sent Poonkuzhali to help me in this grand task.”

“I know. This boat-girl is very smart. But what is that important message,
Vanathi that made you travel all night?”

“Yes, Periappa. It’s an urgent message for the Emperor. It is about Ponniyin
Selvan.”

“Oh My God! Is it about him? Do you know anything about him?”

“I know everything about him. He is the bravest of the brave. He is the most
valiant warrior in the Kingdom. He was saved from drowning in River Cauvery
when he was a child. He did not drown even when he fell into the sea. He never
lets down those who have taken refuge under him. He worships his parents. He
will never go against their words. He worships his sister Kunthavai. He is not
interested in ruling the country.”

“Enough! Enough! I never meant that, my child. I want to know where he is. Is
he safe?”

“He is safe, Periappa. I also know where he is right now. But I can’t reveal that
to you now, Periappa.”

“What? You can’t tell that even to me? Is that you who are talking, Vanathi?”

“Yes, Periappa. I am the one who is talking. I have promised that I won’t
disclose the whereabouts of the Prince to anybody.”

The General struggled hard to control his fury.

“I am disappointed, girl. Totally disappointed. I thought if I sent you to Princess
Kunthavai she will mould you into a good person with all the good qualities of a
noble Princess. But she has brought you up as an adamant and arrogant brat.
Enough is enough. You need not stay in Pazhaiyaarai any longer. Get down from
the elephant first. I shall pack you off to Kodumbalur right now.”

“Periappa, I too am not keen to step on the soil of this capital city. That’s why I
am still seated on the elephant. But the problem is these elephants become mad
quite often. It was only this morning this elephant flung a person far away.
Please don’t come near the beast. It is dangerous. I will deliver the messages and
come to you. You can then pack me off to Kodumbalur or to any other place on
earth. But for heaven’s sake please let me go now. Let me do my duty, Periappa.”

The General thought for a while.

“Ok, my child. I’ll let you go. What will you do if the doors of the Fort do not
open for you?”

“Periappa, haven’t you come with a huge army? If the gates do not open for me,
use your military might to break-open the gates.”

The General was justifiably proud of his niece.

“My dear child, only now you talk like the real Princess of Kodumbalur. If need
arises I won’t think twice to break open the gates to let you in. But I don’t think
it will be necessary. You have brought a message to the Emperor from Princess
Kunthavai. The Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar cannot stop you. Who is he? I am sure
he will never exceed his powers. When you deliver your messages please deliver
one from me too, my dear child. This is to be delivered to Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. Tell him that when you are inside the Fort even if the tip of
your nail is hurt, well, he had it. I will annihilate the entire clan of
Pazhuvettaraiyars without a trace. Tell him that I and my companions are waiting
outside the Fort to meet the Emperor in person to know what is in his mind. If he
fails to arrange for a private audience with the Emperor before tomorrow
morning tell him that we will start demolishing the mighty Fort of Thanjavur.”

“I will do that, Periappa.”

The mahout was eavesdropping on the conversation and waited for it to end.

He blew his pipe again and started announcing in a shrill voice.

“GIVE WAY FOR THE PRINCESS OF KODUMBALUR. OPEN THE GATES
OF THE FORT TO LET HER IN.”

Chapter 26: Vanathi’s Entry

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was in a state of mental turmoil. He was second to none
when it came to valour. But his weakness was that he was used to taking his
brother’s advice in whatever he did. That made him feel like fish out of water in
that crisis situation. The Senior had not returned from Kadambur yet.

The Junior had been hearing all bad news since morning.

First he got a message that the Senior had left the palace of Kadambur
Sambuvaraiyar two days ago. The message was clear: he was headed for
Thanjavur. River Coleroon was in floods. Several passenger boats had gone
missing. Finally a soldier who travelled with the Senior came to Thanjavur. He
told the Junior that the boat had sunk and the Senior was missing.

The news brought in by another spy was even more disturbing. Prince
Arulmozhivarman had come out of his hiding in the coastal town of
Nagapattinam and was headed to Thanjavur with thousands of people on tow.
The Prince was staying at Thiruvarur for the night while the spy braved the
floods to bring the news early in the morning.

A little later a messenger came from Sambuvaraiyar. His news was grave.
Thirukkovilur Malaiyaman was gathering an army to invade Kadambur. Adithya
Karikalan was in a state of frenzy and he was becoming worse by the day.
Sambuvaraiyar could no longer deal with the crazy Prince. He requested the
Senior to come to Kadambur forthwith.

The problem was that the Senior had not yet reached Thanjavur. How could he
go to Kadambur? Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s valour was well-known. Even the
Lord of Death was afraid to come near him. But perhaps was he washed away in
the floods at River Coleroon? The Junior was shaken.

As if to cap them all the worst news of the day came from the spies from down
south. They told the Junior that the General of the Southern Command, Bhoothi
Vikrama Kesari was marching towards the Thanjavur Fort with a huge army.
And that the army filled up all the three roads that led to Thanjavur from south.

As a knee-jerk reaction the Junior ordered the gates of the Fort to be closed
forthwith. He issued strict orders: Nobody from inside should go out; nor should
anybody from outside get in.

As was the custom he entrusted the King’s personal security to the Velakkara
Padai and entrusted the security of the Fort to his own men. He wanted to
apprise the Emperor of all these developments. He wanted to consult the Chief
Minister before meeting the Emperor. Of course he never trusted the Chief
Minister much. Fortunately for him the Chief Minister was inside the Fort at that
time. The Junior heaved a sigh of relief. So long as the Minister was inside the
Fort he could not indulge in any mischief without the knowledge of the Junior or
his spies.

Another idea came to his mind.

Instead of seeing the Emperor alone why don’t I take the Chief Minister along?

The Junior believed that Prince Arulmozhivarman and Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari

had surrounded the Fort only with an intention to capture Thanjavur. If the
Junior shared his findings with the Emperor he may not believe him. The
presence of the Chief Minister by his side might lend credibility to his words.

The Chief Minister was worried too. First he was not happy with Princess
Kunthavai leaving Thanjavur in the morning. The Mute Queen of Lanka and
Poonkuzhali had gone missing since morning. This added to his woes.

“Where could they have gone? And how? What for?” These questions were
eroding his peace. When he knew that Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari had come with a
huge army he was thoroughly shaken.

But he was not for sharing all these disturbing developments with the Emperor.

“I hear that the Emperor is already worried. A maid from the Queen’s palace had
come just now to tell that the Emperor was not keeping well. This is not the right
time to tell him about Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari laying siege to the Fort. Who
knows, blood vessels in his brain may burst and endanger his life. Already there
is a rumour that the Emperor is dead. Just think what will happen if the rumour
becomes true. There will be a rumour that you killed the Emperor. That will
make your enemies very strong. They will now have a strong reason to invade
the Fort.

My suggestion is to wait for some more time. Let us first try to find out what is
in the mind of the General. Meanwhile we may get some definitive news about
the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and Prince Arulmozhivarman. Patience and patience
alone is the need of the hour.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar accepted the sane counsel. But he wanted to get away
from the political intrigues.

“In that case I will be happy and extremely grateful if the Honourable Minister
takes the responsibility of informing the Emperor at the right time. Let me focus
on the security measures very badly needed inside the Fort at this time.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar took leave of the Chief Minister.

He was overseeing the security arrangements along the perimeter of the Fort
wall. The siege may last for several days. The Fort should be prepared to
withstand the siege. The soldiers from Kodumbalur might try to break the gates
or scale the walls to enter the Fort. He wanted his men to be prepared for any
contingency. He wanted to place his trusted soldiers at all the strategic locations
along the Fort wall. If any part of the wall is weak the same must be repaired on
a war footing. A part of his army was deployed for this purpose.

As he was attending to all these things he wanted to know what was happening
outside the Fort.

There were two underground passages to the Fort. These passages went beneath
the moat and one could get outside the Fort through them bypassing the security
at the gate. One passage went from the palace of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar
through the underground treasury. That passage could not be used now. Because
the passage opened very close to River Vadavaaru. The river was in floods now;
opening the passage now might lead to water entering the underground treasury.

The other passage went through the Chief Minister’s Palace. But nobody could

use that passage without the knowledge of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. The place
where exactly the passage crossed the walls of the Fort, the Junior had
established a security check post. The Junior wanted to send his trusted men
after midnight through the passage. These men should go to Kadambur and
Pazhaiyaarai to gather news about Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and Prince
Arulmozhivarman.

A soldier came running to the Junior. He told him that two women riding an
elephant were at the gates of the Fort. The mahout wanted the gates to be opened
for them.

When the Junior learned that one of the women was Vanathi he was surprised.
After all it was her uncle – her father’s own brother – who was waiting with a
huge army outside the Fort, ready to invade it any time. This girl should have
real josh to seek entry at this time.

At first he wanted to brutally deny entry to Vanathi. But as he was walking
towards the main northern entrance his mind changed.

“Why should I be afraid of a little girl? Is it not a disgrace to my valour?” He
thought. He was also curious to know what was in her mind.

He climbed up a flight of stairs to have a look. There were only two women on
the elephant apart from the mahout. He was sure one of the women was Vanathi.
When the Junior was looking at them, Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari, the General of
the Southern Command was talking to his niece. Since they were speaking aloud
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar could overhear a part of their conversation. He heard the
General requesting Vanathi not to go in. But Vanathi was adamant. She wanted
to get in at any cost. She shared her intentions with her uncle. Junior overheard
that as well. Now he wanted to open the gates for Vanathi.

After the conversation was over, the General moved away. The elephant moved
forward and was now standing close to the moat.

The mahout blew his pipe once again.

“Open the gates of the Fort to welcome the Princess of Kodumbalur. She brings
news for the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar from his brother, the Senior. She also
carries a message for the Emperor from Princess Kunthavai.”

The mahout announced one more time in his characteristic high pitched voice.

The Junior heard the mahout. All the doubts in his mind were cleared. It was
strange that the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar chose Vanathi to send a message to the
Junior. That might be a trick or bait. It might be. But he would surely find that
out. ‘If this girl wants to trick me then she can’t go out of the Fort alive.’

Afew minutes later somebody inside the Fort blew a pipe in response to the
mahout. The sound came from the top storey of the Fort. A few flaming torches
appeared. Pointed end of spears shone in the light of torches. A number of bows
laden with arrows ready to shoot were also visible in that light. A human figure
appeared in the centre.

“The gates of the Fort will be opened to let the Kodumbalur Princess in. Only
the elephant and those riding on it will be allowed to enter the Fort. Anyone
trying to follow them will be killed immediately.”

A voice thundered.

General Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari and his men heard the announcement. They
moved a little farther from the gates of the Fort.

The gates of the Fort were opened. The bridge was lowered over the moat. When
the elephant walked over the bridge it creaked. Vanathi was afraid that the bridge
might fall down. But nothing happened. The elephant reached the other side of
the moat and entered the Fort through the opened gates. The next second the
bridge was lifted up and the gates were closed shut with a loud bang.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s elephant came near Vanathi’s elephant.

“Princess of Kodumbalur! Welcome to the Fort! You ignored the words of your
uncle and have chosen to come in as my guest. I am very happy, my child. You
are my guest, my child. I will give my life to protect you. You need not have any
fear, my child.”

The Junior’s voice was quite majestic.

“I never had those fears. Please let me do my duty first. I’ll deliver the messages.
Then I don’t care even if you throw me into your famous underground prison.”

Vanathi’s voice was equally majestic.

Chapter 27: STOP HERE!

When Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar heard the word “underground prison” from
Vanathi he was reminded of what happened in the past. He got so worked up that
he even forgot the formal politeness and courtesy due to the Princess of
Kodumbalur. He told her almost in a rude tone:

“Yes, now I remember. You went to the underground prison once and that too
with Princess Kunthavai. You two went there to know about a person who came
to spy on us and then escaped from the prison. Am I right?”

“No, you are not. We did not go to the prison to know about a spy. We went
there to know about a messenger sent by the Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan.”

“That was what you thought. How could you know whether he was a messenger
or a spy? You are too young to know the ways of the world. There is no point in
discussing espionage with you. But at least tell me this. Did you get to know
about the person?”

“No. The person whom we wanted to see had been released from prison even
before we went there. The orders of the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur preceded us.
What can you do, Sir? You too were helpless like us.”

The Junior bit his lips. He was furious over his brother, Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar,
who had granted too much of liberties to his young wife. And that had made him
a laughing stock before Vanathi. He hid his humiliation and spoke in a rough
voice.

“But on your part you released another crazy idiot.”

“I think you are referring to Chendan Amudhan who brings flowers to the
temple. You will be surprised to know how the Chozha Kingdom immensely
gained by his release.”

“Hey girl, I am past all those surprises. I have become tired of the number of
people to whom the Chozha Kingdom is indebted. I presume you too have come
to confer a great benefit on the Chozha country. I am sure the Kingdom will be
indebted to you as well.”

“Yes, Sir. You are right. If it is not that important your brother would not have
sent me here. And if is not a dire emergency he would not have chosen a silly
girl like me for this great mission.”

“You are right. I know how fast my brother’s intelligence is growing every day.
That is evident from the fact that of all the persons available to him he chose you
for this mission. I don’t have much time. Tell me what the message is.”

“Your brother wanted you to know that we have been quite complacent about the
Pandya conspirators. Some of the personal body guards of the slain Pandya
King, Veera Pandiyan are involved in a terrible conspiracy. They have set a date
to seek revenge. Your brother asked you to be extra careful with the security
arrangements for the Emperor.”

The Junior laughed.

“Is that all? I thought he would have sent news about your uncle invading the
Fort. If your uncle takes care of the Kodumbalur Army outside the Fort I’ll take
care of the Emperor inside the Fort. You, or for that matter, Princess Kunthavai
need not worry about the Emperor’s safety.”

“Perhaps your brother knew that you will consider his warning lightly. That was
the reason he wanted me to convey another important message. It seems you
have been warning your brother of a sorcerer who used to frequent the palace of
the Junior Queen. And your brother, the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar, never paid
heed to your warning. He even chided you for interfering in his wife’s affairs. I
will repeat his words verbatim: “Thambi, I have erred. That sorcerer Ravidasan
is a conspirator from the Pandya Kingdom. He is the head of the personal body
guards of the slain king Veera Pandiyan. He has taken a vow to destroy the entire
Chozha clan. One of his men might try to kill our Emperor today. Don’t be
complacent. Tighten the security. Be extremely alert. Anything may happen any
time” This is exactly the message from your elder brother. I have done my duty
now.”

The Junior was shocked. He knew very well that nobody except the Senior could
have sent that kind of a message.

“If that is true why he has not come here? Why did he send you?”

“He did not exactly send me to you. He conveyed the message to Princess
Kunthavai who sent me to you. Adithya Karikalan is also in danger. So the
Senior has rushed to Kadambur to save him.”

“Where did he see you?”

“At the Kudanthai Astrologer’s house. If you don’t believe me still, listen to this.
When your brother attempted to cross River Coleroon his boat capsized in the
floods. He somehow managed to swim to the shore and was resting in the War
Memorial at Thiruppurambayam. There he happened to overhear the
conspirators discussing their murderous plans. Do you want to continue the
discussion still or shall we go to the Palace?”

“Whatever you said might be true. But you must know that no conspirator can
get past the security at the gates of the Fort. I let you in for the only reason you
are a woman.”

“What if the conspirators are hidden inside the Fort?”

“Impossible.”

“Well that’s your responsibility. My duty... “

“Is over. You may go now.”

“No, Sir. I have just finished one half of my duties. I have to meet the Emperor
and deliver the message from Princess Kunthavai. Only then I would have
discharged all my responsibilities.”

“You can deliver the message to me. I will. “

“Impossible. Princess Kunthavai has asked me to deliver the message personally
to the Emperor. Here is the Princess’ signet ring.”

“Oh, signet ring! Everybody has a signet ring these days. What is the assurance
that the Princess gave this to you? How can I believe you especially when your
uncle has laid siege to the Fort?”

“Oh you are then afraid that even a girl like me can be dangerous.”

“We belong to the Pazhuvur Clan and the word fear is unknown to us. Know this
first.”

“Then let me go into the Palace. After all you are going to come with me.”

“But I am afraid that the Emperor is a little shaken today...”

“I have brought some good news for him. And if only you knew what the news
is all about, you will feel sad that you delayed my entry for so long.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was surprised.

“Hey Girl, have you brought news about Prince Arulmozhivarman?”

“Yes, Commander.”

“That’s great. Is he all right? Where is he now? I am sure the conspirators have
not....”

“Yes, the conspirators made an attempt on his life. But by God’s grace the Prince
escaped unhurt. Are you happy now?”

“What a silly question, girl? If the Prince Arulmozhivarman is fine will anybody
be sad? Ok, come with me. Let us not waste any further time. You convey the
happy news to the Emperor in my presence.”

All along the Junior remained seated on his elephant and was talking to Vanathi
who was seated on another elephant. He commanded his elephant to go forward.
He was also eager to know about Ponniyin Selvan. He never thought of the
Prince as a competition to his son-in-law Madhuranthakan. He also knew for
sure that the Emperor never wanted Ponniyin Selvan to succeed him. And
Arulmozhi would never go against the words of his father. The only problem
was Princess Kunthavai who had the nasty habit of messing up things.

‘Is she up to something now? Does she have the Prince in her custody? Is she
holding him hostage and demanding the Kingdom for him? If this Kodumbalur
girl has really brought some news about Ponniyin Selvan and if she conveyed it
to the Emperor he will surely share it with me. In a way it is better to know what
is in the mind of Ponniyin Selvan now. That will help me to plan my course of
action to get the throne for my son-in-law. I can also use this opportunity to tell
the Emperor about Bhoothi Vikramakesari’s attempt to invade the Fort’

Both the elephants stood at the Palace gates. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar jumped
elegantly from the elephant. The other elephant moved slowly and knelt down.
The two women and the mahout got down. The Junior called the guard and
barked orders. The gates were opened.

The Junior was still pondering on the message from his brother. He wanted to
ignore the message; but could not. He was especially disturbed by that part of
the message concerning Sorcerer Ravidasan. He knew about the personal body
guards of the slain Pandya King Veera Pandiyan. But he never knew that they
could be inside the Thanjavur Fort. That was frightening.

He had been thinking that the Junior Queen was consulting the Sorcerer often
only to seduce her husband and keep him under her control. She might have
even wanted to create a rift between the brothers. But the latest news brought by
Vanathi was frightening. But what could the Sorcerer or for that matter any
conspirator do?

Not even a mosquito can enter the Palace without the Junior’s permission. The
Emperor never went out of the Palace.

Even then it was prudent to tighten the security arrangements around the Palace.
A lot of people had come into the Fort on the pretext of meeting the Chief
Minister or for claiming relief from the King for the recent floods. The Junior
was not sure whether all those people have left the Fort. In a way it was better
that he ordered closing the gates of the Fort suddenly in the afternoon. He could
use the opportunity to thoroughly investigate those inside the Fort to find out if
there was anyone with evil intentions. He could arrest anyone who looked
suspicious.

He was planning his next course of action as he entered the Palace. He
summoned his men and ordered them to score every square inch inside the Fort
and bring any suspicious persons to him.

He then ordered the leader of the King’s personal body guards, the Velakkara
Padai to come to him. He wanted them to be inside the Fort all night, fully alert
to ward off any possible attacks on the Emperor.

He then turned around to look at the girls who came on the elephant. They had
by that time crossed the front yard of the palace and were near the steps.

But who was the third person? Oh My God! Wasn’t he the mahout? Yes, his
head gear revealed his identity. He was the one who drove the elephant which
carried the two women. But why should the mahout follow the women? What
business did he have with the Emperor?

A terrible thought entered his mind like a lightning. He was shocked. He was
furious. Perhaps... perhaps... the mahout was..... the assassin. He was a
conspirator who somehow hoodwinked the two girls and had entered the palace
disguised as a mahout.

Oh My God! I was duped as well. A conspirator from the Pandya Kingdom,
perhaps one of the body guards of the slain Pandya King Veera Pandiyan was
entering the Palace under his very nose intent on assassinating the Emperor. If
only this was known to the outside world the Junior would be considered as one
of the greatest fools in the Empire. Or perhaps this mahout was one of Bhoothi
Vikrama Kesari’s men. He would know in a few seconds.

He ran to the mahout.

“STOP HERE!” The Junior roared.

“Why are you going in? The mahout has no business inside the Palace.”

The Junior grabbed the mahout’s hand with his iron grip.

The two women heard the Junior’s roar and turned around. There was some fear,
some surprise and even some curiosity in their faces. And then there was a smile.

Vanathi tried to speak. “You know... you know. He... is... he... is... none other
than... “

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar who was in the peak of anger did not turn to look at her
or listen to her. His worst fears were confirmed because the mahout stood
transfixed in his place. He first thought that it was Vandhiya Thevan who
escaped from his iron grip long ago. Perhaps he had come again to try his tricks
on him. This time he could never dream of escaping from me.

He tightened his grip on the mahout’s hand.

“COME ON, SPEAK THE TRUTH. ARE YOU REALLY A MAHOUT? OR A
CONSPIRATOR? OR THE SPY WHO ESCAPED FROM ME ONCE?
WHOEVER YOU MAY BE I AM NOT GOING TO LEAVE YOU THIS TIME.

YOU HAD IT.”

Without loosening the grip on the mahout’s arms he used his other hand to turn
his face towards him.

Light from the torches in the main hall of the Palace fell on the majestic face of
the ‘mahout.’

“Commander, I am a mahout too. I have never escaped from you. I have never
even tried. In fact I have come here to surrender myself to you. I learn that the
Emperor has issued orders to arrest me.”

The Junior saw his face. He heard his voice. He felt as if the sky fell on him. He
was frozen. He even forgot to loosen the grip on his hand.

Gradually, very slowly his hand released Prince Arulmozhivarman.

Chapter 28: Slogans Rose

Nobody knew what magical powers the young, golden face of Prince
Arulmozhivarman had. There was no frown. There was not even a mild irritation
let alone anger. He had the facial expression of Lord Krishna when he was
caught stealing butter. There were no symptoms of his finding fault with the
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar or fighting against him.

And yet the fearless and the ever-strong Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar trembled. Drops
of sweat appeared on his face. Unaware of what he was doing he folded his
shivering hands towards the Prince and spoke in a choked voice:

“Ponniyin Selva! The Great Warrior Who Won Over Sri Lanka! The Darling of
Chozha Kingdom! What is this? What are you doing? What did I do to merit this
harsh punishment? I beg of you, please forgive me for the grave offence of
insulting you a few minutes ago. I am waiting to hear the word ‘Forgiven’
coming from your mouth. I have eyes; but I was blind.”

He was about to continue in the same strain when the Prince stopped him.

“Commander, what are you talking? How can you do anything wrong? How can
this small, silly boy forgive you?”

“Even if my hand that blocked your entry into your palace is cut it won’t be
enough of a punishment. Even if my tongue which spoke to you in derision is
pulled out of my mouth it won’t be the right punishment for my crime.”

“I can’t bear to hear such words from you, Commander. Stop it. Please, for
heaven’s sake. You did your duty. What’s wrong in that? The fault is entirely
mine. You might not have expected that I would come as a mahout.... “

“That’s true. I never expected. But tell me, Your Majesty, how can you do that to
me? What made you do that? Is this the way that I should welcome the greatest
warrior of the Chozha Kingdom? I should have waited at the gates of the Fort
with the drums playing and with all the paraphernalia dictated by the Royal
Protocol to welcome the King who is coming home.”

“Commander, I knew you would do that. That was why I came like this. This is
not the time for formal reception and Royal paraphernalia. You know better. You
heard the Kodumbalur Princess speaking about the evil plans of the conspirators.
I am afraid that they may be true.”

“Prince, are you by any chance thinking that I am one of the Pandya
conspirators?”

“Oh My God! What are you talking? I am happy to see the arrangements you
have made for protecting the Emperor. First let me see my father and then....”

“Prince, do you think that I will prevent you from seeing your father? Has
anybody told you that I am such an evil person? “

“Even if they did I wouldn’t have believed that, Commander.”

“Then, Prince, why should you come like this?”

“Do you think I can enter the Fort in any other form? The Southern Regiment
has laid siege to the Fort. You know the reason Kodumbalur Chieftain is here.”

“In this situation am I right in closing down the gates of the Fort? Did I do
anything wrong?”

“Not at all. You were right. The Kodumbalur Chieftain has lost his mind. I
thought his presence at the gates will sort of block my entry. That was why I
came as a mahout. And I took his niece with me. Thank God he did not
recognise me. But I could not escape your sharp eyes, Commander.”

“My eyes too were closed, Prince. That was why I could not recognise you
immediately. I called you mahout. I used derisive language on you. Please be
kind enough to forgive me.”

“Commander, please don’t talk like that. I don’t see any difference between you
and my father. I hear that you sent men with orders to arrest me and bring me
here... “

“Oh My God! What words, Prince! Did I send my men to arrest you? Not at all,
Prince. Your father wanted to see you immediately. And it was because of his
orders I sent my men to bring you home.”

“I know that, Commander. They approached me when I was in Lanka. Those
who were with me whispered in my ears, ‘The orders of arrest have not come
from the Emperor but from the Pazhuvettaraiyars.’”

“Our enemies would have spoken like that.”

“Do you know my response? “I will bow down to my father’s orders. And the
same applies to orders from the Pazhuvettaraiyars. For me there is no difference
between the two.” I am true to my word, Commander. I have braved storms,
floods and rains to reach you. I thought once I get into the gates of the Palace I
will know what is in your mind and submit myself to your will. I don’t want to
see my father without your permission.”

“Your Majesty, by any chance are you testing me? Who the hell am I to give
permission to you to see your father? If you want me to come with you I will.
And if you want me to stay here, I will. Your wish is my command, Your
Majesty.”

“Commander, looks like you will have to stand here. I think we have been here
longer than necessary. See there.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar turned to look.

He found that all his men who were standing at a distance had come near. Along
with them the guards at the gates had also come. Even some of the guards
belonging to the Velakkara Padai had come. They were all looking at the Prince.
When the Junior turned the other side to look at them he had moved away from
the light. The light now shone on the handsome face of Prince

Arulmozhivarman.

One of the soldiers shouted:

“Hail Prince Arulmozhivarman!”

Another followed:

“Hail Ponniyin Selvan!”

Another joined:

“Hail The Warrior Who Made King Mahindan Flee!”

“Hail the One who Won Over Lanka!”

Many joined. The Velakkara Padai came there. Now many people were shouting
slogans:

“Hail Ponniyin Selvan!”

Since they were at the Palace gates and since Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was
present there the sound was a little low. It resembled the sound of the leaves of a
pupil tree rustling in a strong breeze.

But as days passed into weeks and months that mild sound was going to grow in
volume and intensity and would become the roar of a thousand waves of a
mighty ocean. But that was to happen much later.

“Commander, we did a mistake. We should not have stood here to talk. Now you
know why I did not want to reveal myself till I entered the Palace.”

“Yes, Your Majesty. I will take care of them. Please get in. Quick! .”

Chapter 29: Doubt, Mistrust And Disaster

After Ponniyin Selvan went into the Palace Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar approached
the King’s personal bodyguards.

“What is this noise? Don’t you know that the Emperor is sick and he is taking
rest inside the Palace? Don’t you know that we are surrounded by our enemies
outside the Fort?”

The leader of Velakkara Padai spoke to the Junior.

“Commander, are we really surrounded by enemies? From when did the
Kodumbalur Chieftain become our enemy?”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had to struggle hard to keep his temper.

“You should ask that question only to him. If he is not our enemy then why the
hell should he lay siege to the Fort?”

“We hear that he wants to place Prince Arulmozhivarman on the Chozha
throne.”

“Do you all agree to that?”

The Leader turned towards his men.

“You tell him.”

“We do agree. We want him on the throne. Hail Ponniyin Selvan! Hail the Prince
who won over Srilanka”

Slogans were raised once again. This time they were louder and stronger.

Junior’s face turned red in anger. He gritted his teeth and spoke:

“Can Kodumbalur Chieftain decide on the issue of succession? Or can you, the
King’s bodyguards decide? Should we not hear what is in the mind of the
Emperor?”

One of the bodyguards posed a blunt question to the Junior.

“Commander, is the Emperor all right? Are you sure?”

“Why this silly question?” The Commander hissed.

The Leader spoke this time.

“There are rumours about the Emperor’s health. Even we, his personal
bodyguards, could not see him today. We are all worried about the Emperor’s
well-being.”

“Didn’t I tell you why you cannot see the Emperor today? Today he is a little
shaken. He does not want to see anybody. He refused to come to the
auditorium.”

“Why should the Emperor be shaken? What’s the reason for the confusion in his
mind? Don’t we have the right to know why he refuses to see us, his personal
bodyguards?”

“Good. I will tell you now. There was no news about Prince Arulmozhivarman
who had been to Lanka. Our Emperor was unduly worried about his safety. That
made him restless. Now that the Prince has come to see him..... “

“We want to see the Prince in good light.”

One of the guards said.

“Yes, we want to see him. Hail Ponniyin Selvan!” Others echoed. And raised
slogans once again.

“Let the Prince first see his father. And then if he wishes he will come to see
you.”

“Are you sure, Commander? Can we believe your words? Or will you condemn
him to the underground prison once he comes out of the Emperor’s room?”

Had these words been spoken on any other occasion the soldiers of Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar would have pounced on the bodyguards. The civil war
everybody wanted to avert outside the Fort would have happened right inside the
Fort and that too at the gates of the Palace. The soldiers employed by the Junior
were a bunch of ruffians thirsting for action. But on that day, perhaps because
they had seen the soft countenance of Ponniyin Selvan, the Junior’s men were
unusually calm and unruffled.

The Junior’s hand reached for his sword. He wanted to sever the head of that
impudent idiot who asked that question. But he controlled himself and then
laughed loudly.

“Did you hear him? He asks me whether Prince Arulmozhivarman will be sent
to the underground prison. Good that he asked that question. As the commander
in charge of the security of this Fort I don’t have the powers to place the Prince
on the throne or condemn him to the underground prison. Everything will
happen exactly as per the orders of the Emperor. Even if the Prince were to be
sent to the underground prison he has to be taken through this way. You can see
him at that time.”

There was fire in the eyes of the Junior as he spoke these words. He ignored the
slogans shouted by the Kings’ bodyguards and walked towards the Palace.

He saw Poonkuzhali standing alone near the steps.

“Hey girl, why are you standing here? Did anybody refuse to let you inside the
Palace?”

“No, Commander. I do not want to go in.”

“Why?”

“The father and his son are meeting after a very long time. Why should I intrude
on their privacy?”

“That’s okay. I am happy that at least you believe that the Emperor is alive.”

“I not only believe it, Commander. I saw with my own eyes – he is doing well.
Only then I came back.”

“Tell that to those people – the King’s personal bodyguards. They don’t believe
that the Emperor is alive.”

“Till this moment their suspicion is baseless. But what is the guarantee that their
worst fears will not come true the very next moment?”

“Are you trying to scare me? Have you all gone mad?”

“Many people call me crazy. At times I do admit I am crazy. But it was only
because our Prince listened to this crazy woman’s advice he was able to enter the
Fort without any danger. And could meet the Emperor when he is still alive.”

“What the hell happened to you? You too want to set a date for the Emperor’s
end? Did you listen to the idiots and the astrologers? Or do you know something
more?”

“Apart from the idiots and astrologers there are others who have set a date for
the Emperor. Didn’t you hear the message from your brother?”

“What is the guarantee that it is true?”

“But, Commander, tell me why should Kodumbalur Princess lie in this matter?”

“Who knows? She might want to ascend the Chozha Throne as an Empress?”

“I too thought like that, Commander. But after I heard her taking a terrible vow
this morning I changed my mind.”

“Hey, girl, perhaps you have an eye on the throne?” A sarcastic smile danced on
the lips of the Junior.

“Commander, I now concede that I am a crazy girl. I should not have stopped to
talk to you.” - Poonkuzhali tried to walk away.

A change came over the Junior.

“I was just kidding. Please tell me what you wanted to tell.”

“I will have to, Commander. Otherwise I will feel guilty. And you too. If
something happens to the Emperor the entire country will blame only you. Your
commandos may also be blamed.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar’s face fell.

“If something like that happened I won’t wait for the people to blame. Before I
hear their accusing words my life would have left my body. These guards from
Velakkara Padai took the terrible oath of laying down their lives in doing their
duty to protect the Emperor at the Durga Parameswari temple. I took that terrible
oath even before they did. In fact I led them on that day.”

“What’s the use, Commander? The Chozha Empire will lose its Emperor and
along with him a great warrior. Will it not be prudent to be a little more careful
than lose our lives after the event?”

“What are you talking, girl? Are you implying that I am careless? See how many
soldiers are guarding the Palace round the clock? What for? Do you know that

even our Chief Minster cannot enter the Palace without my knowledge?”

“I know, Commander. But danger can from within the Palace.”

“What nonsense? Do you think that the women in the Palace will poison the
Emperor? Or do you doubt the intentions of the Kodumbalur Princess who went
in to see the Emperor along with the Prince?”

“Oh My God! Anybody who doubts that sweet innocent girl will be cursed to go
to hell. She is not that shrewd. But tell me this Commander. Isn’t there an
underground passage to this Palace?”

The Junior was clearly shocked.

“What do you know about the passage? And how? But for three or four people
nobody knows about that passage. Whosoever knows about the passage cannot
go out alive from the Palace.”

“Commander I came to know about the underground passage only this morning.
I saw a Pandya conspirator with a sharp spear hiding there.”

“Oh My God! What are you talking girl? Do you know where the passage leads
to?”

“It goes through the underground treasury.”

“Now I remember. What you said might be true. It could be the work of that
witch which taken the form of a woman. It must be the work of that devil which
has enslaved my brother. Oh My God! How many times did I warn him! Hey
girl, are you telling the truth? Did you see for yourself? Do you know where the
passage is?”

“I knew when my aunt took me through the passage.”

“Who is your aunt?”

“The one who was dragged from Kodikkarai in your palanquin as per the orders
issued by the Chief Minister. Commander, as we are discussing..... .
something...might...”

“It’s true. Let me go to my brother’s palace and oversee the security
arrangements. Till then you..... “

“I will stand here and take care of this end, Commander.”

“How can I trust you, girl? What if you are also a part of the Pandya
conspirators? You may send me away and... “

“Then do one thing Commander. You come with me. Please have a burning torch
in your hand. I’ll tell you the other details as we go.”

The Junior went out and barked orders to his men. Some of them were seen
leaving. Poonkuzhali guessed that they must be going to the Pazhuvur Palace.
The Junior borrowed a torch from one of the guards and came back to
Poonkuzhali.

“Girl, you show me the way. Let me see if you are telling the truth.”

Even at that time the Junior could not trust Poonkuzhali. He suspected that she
was trying to deceive him with a fantastic yarn woven by her. Or perhaps she
wanted to know about the secret underground passage from him. Perhaps she
might even think of smuggling the soldiers of the Kodumbalur Army through the
passage.

No, I can’t be so easily duped. And if this girl has such evil intentions then I will
give her a punishment which she will not forget till she lives. I am not like my
brother, Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Let her lead the way. That way I can make sure
if she knows about the underground passage already. Then let me find out if the
conspirators are hiding there. And if that’s true..... Oh My God..... What a
disaster! What a disgrace! But thank God it won’t be very difficult to prevent an
assassination attempt even now. The assassin will be trapped like a fox in its
hole.

The Junior followed Poonkuzhali with these thoughts raging in his disturbed
mind. He was surprised by Poonkuzhali’s speed.

Poonkuzhali’s mind was working at its fullest speed. And her legs were trying to
match the speed of her mind.

Poonkuzhali’s life had been riddled with strange happenings in the recent past.
But there was no comparison to what had happened to her on that fateful day.
Early in the morning her aunt had woken her up. They could see a gory face
through the balcony window. It vanished immediately. Mandhakini got up
without making any noise. She grabbed Poonkuzhali’s hand and started walking
towards the art gallery of the palace. The gallery was closed at that time in the
morning.

The same gory face was visible in the Ravana’s statue in the gallery – exactly
between his numerous heads and the hands that bore the Mount Kailash. It was
there only for a tiniest fraction of a second. And then the face disappeared. The
two women went near the statue. Poonkuzhali then found that an underground
passage started between the heads of the Ravana statue.

Mandhakini stepped down into the passage. Poonkuzhali followed her. At first
Poonkuzhali could not see anything. The place was utterly dark. She held her
aunt’s hand and walked slowly groping along the way. As soon as they climbed a
few steps they reached what they thought was a kind of a large hall. The hall was
also dark. They felt the walls and pillars with their hands to avoid hitting against
them. After some time faint rays of light came through the window-sills on the
top of the hall. Poonkuzhali guessed that the sun was the light-source. And that
the day had fully dawned. She also discovered that they were in the underground
treasury.

But the chances of finding the conspirator were quite bleak. There were a
thousand places to hide in the dark underground treasury. The conspirator could
have hidden himself somewhere. It was possible that he might find them before
they found him. And in that event he might attack them from behind and even
kill them. Nobody would know.

When Poonkuzhali was immersed in these thoughts Mandhakini hollered in her
unique voice, something which could be classified neither as a human voice nor
the sound of a nocturnal animal. That was followed by the cry of a frightened
man. A shadowy figure ran away. That must have been the man who showed his
face in the window a little while ago, Poonkuzhali thought.

The man must have heard Mandhakini’s unique voice and must have thought of
her as a ghost or a super-natural creature. He was running for his life.
Poonkuzhali smiled. Mandhakini raised her voice once again. She made the
frightened conspirator run across the treasury several times. At last the man hit a
wooden door. Then he banged on the door. The door opened. There was a lady
on the other side of the door. The man spoke to the lady. It appeared as if the
lady hesitated. The man seemed to threaten her. She then went away. The man
stood near the door looking on both the sides.

A little later the lady came with a lamp. The man and the woman entered the
passage once again. Mandhakini grabbed Poonkuzhali’s hand and dragged her to
hiding place behind a large pillar. They saw the man in good light.

The man and the lady went into the interior part of the treasury.

“What the hell are you blabbering? Ghost? Witch? Spirit? You are terribly
frightened. You should not have taken this assignment at all.”

Poonkuzhali heard the words clearly. She did not understand what assignment
the lady was talking about.

As soon as the man and the lady disappeared into the treasury Mandhakini

dragged Poonkuzhali to the opened door. They got out through the door. They
crossed a long corridor and entered a large garden. In a secluded place
Mandhakini communicated what was in her mind through sign language.

“My end is near. I want to see Prince Arulmozhivarman before I die. Please
bring him here. At any cost.”

Poonkuzhali loved her aunt more than anybody else in the world. She did not
have the heart to leave her alone at that time. She could not go against her word
either. She now had an excuse to meet Ponniyin Selvan. That helped her out of
the dilemma. She took leave of her aunt, scaled the wall and jumped on the other
side. She reached the gates of the Fort. There she met Azhwarkkadian. She came
to know that he was on a journey to meet Ponniyin Selvan on the orders of the
Chief Minister. Thanks to Azhwarkkadian she had a comfortable journey.

Luck was on her side on that day. They saw Princess Kunthavai’s chariot at the
Kudanthai Astrologer’s house. They thought that Princess Kunthavai could give
them some information on the whereabouts of the Prince. They entered the
house and overheard what the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar had to say about the
Pandya Conspirators. Poonkuzhali was now sure that the person hiding in the
underground treasury was one of the conspirators. She was worried over the
safety of the Prince. But even that worry was gone when she happened to meet
the Prince when she went to rescue Vanathi from the floods.

Of all the developments what made her the happiest was the Prince agreeing to
her suggestion of going to Thanjavur forthwith. She had heard that when the
Prince had to travel in cognito in Lanka he would go as an elephant mahout. She
did not forget the Prince taking her on his elephant till the sea-shore after he got
himself separated from the General and his soldiers. So she advised the Prince to
adopt the same strategy now. If the Prince ventured to enter the Fort alone he
might be blocked. But if he took the two women – the Kodumbalur Princess and
Poonkuzhali – then people may not notice the Prince who was dressed as a

mahout.

“Samudra Kumari, that is a brilliant idea. You are fit to be a minister of the
Chozha Empire.”

Even now when Poonkuzhali thought of the Prince’s words her body and mind
were thrilled with happiness.

But what was the use of all the luck and all the strategy? Everything happened
according to Poonkuzhali’s plan and yet her aunt was not in the room where the
Emperor slept. She could not enquire anybody about her aunt. When
Poonkuzhali remembered the words of her aunt “My end is near” she trembled
in fear. What was the use of all the trouble, the clever planning and the brilliant
strategy, if her aunt was not to be seen?

Poonkuzhali was restless. Was her aunt still in the underground treasury? She
might have been killed by that conspirator. Her heart bled for her aunt.

She wanted to go to the treasury through the secret passage. But the whole
Palace was buzzing with activity because of the Prince’s visit. Maids were going
in and out of the various halls of the Palace. They mainly went into the
Emperor’s bedroom to have a glimpse of Prince Arulmozhivarman. If in the
midst of this excitement Poonkuzhali walked alone to the art gallery it would
look quite odd. And if the conspirator was still there she might be caught and
even killed by him. Poonkuzhali was a fearless girl; even then the dark
underground treasury gave her jitters.

The only alternative she had was to convince Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and go to

the treasury along with him and his men. It took a considerable time to convince
the Junior. She wanted to make up the loss of time and hence walked fast now.
Her intuition warned her something terrible was about to happen. She was ready
to die; but she wanted to save her aunt at any cost.

As she was entering the art gallery she saw a shadow from the terrace. She also
saw a figure going along the wall. She wanted to check and hence stood there for
some time.

“Why have you stopped girl? Are you afraid your lie is going to be out now?”
She heard the stinging words of the Junior and walked fast.

As soon as she entered the art gallery she pointed out the entrance to the
underground passage to the Junior. It was between Ravana’s head and the
Mountain he was bearing on his shoulders.

“You are right. Get down first.” The Commander ordered.

Poonkuzhali hesitated for a second. Her body trembled. Exactly at that time she
heard the strange sound. It could come only from one person – her aunt
Mandhakini. It was more of a wail than a scream. She found out that the sound
was coming from the Emperor’s bed chambers. All her hesitations were gone.

She ignored the Junior and ran towards the King’s chambers. The scary sound
was heard again and again. When she entered the Emperor’s chambers what she
saw there got etched in her heart.

The Emperor was leaning on his bed holding the hands of his second son,
Arulmozhivarman. Mandhakini stood before them as she screamed. Vanathi and
the Empress were on the other side of the bed. Everyone was staring at
Mandhakini who was screaming like a crazy woman.

Nobody noticed the pointed spear coming towards the Emperor from the terrace.

Poonkuzhali ran up to her aunt.

Chapter 30: A Goddess, She Became!

Poonkuzhali could no doubt run faster than most of the people. Even then she
could not compete with a spear thrown from a great height. Before she could
reach the place the pointed spear pierced her aunt’s body near the costal bone
and came out through the other side. Mandhakini screamed once again and fell
down. Everybody screamed.

Everybody tried to run towards Mandhakini. At that time they all heard sounds
coming from the Palace terrace. Some mud vessels were thrown in all the
directions.

One of the vessels fell on the lamp burning by the Emperor’s bed. The lamp
went off. The room was enveloped in darkness. For sometime pandemonium
prevailed in the bed- chamber and the long corridor outside it. The sound of
footsteps was heard. People were running here and there.

“LAMP! BRING A LAMP! IMMEDIATELY!” Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar
thundered.

“OH NO!”

It was a woman. She screamed. People recognised it as the voice of the Empress.
Everyone trembled. What could have made the Queen scream? Amidst all the
confusion and in utter darkness Poonkuzhali ran to her aunt, remembering the
place when she saw in light. But even before she reached the place somebody
had placed Mandhakini on his lap. She could hear heart-rending sobs.

“WHO IS THAT? STOP THERE. OR YOU HAD IT.” Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar
shouted at the unknown assailant.

Poonkuzhali could guess the identity of the person running away. Two maids
carried lamps into the chamber.

The light from the lamps illuminated a wonderful scene which nobody in the
room expected to see. The Emperor who had been in bed unable to walk for the
last three year, the Emperor who had lost all the power in his legs, had got up
from his bed, walked a few steps and had sat down on the floor near the dying
Mandhakini. Prince Arulmozhivarman was by his side. The pointed end of the
spear that had pierced the Mute Queen had come out on the other side. Blood
was dripping from the spear. Empress Vanamadevi was near the Emperor’s bed.
Very close to her, exactly at the place where the Emperor had rested his head a
few seconds earlier, a knife was stuck in the bed.

As soon as the lamps arrived the Empress stared incredulously at the empty cot
and then at the Emperor sitting on the floor. Her eyes failed to express the sense
of surprise felt by her heart.

Prince Arulmozhivarman gently lifted Mandhakini’s head and placed it on the
Emperor’s lap. An endless stream of tears rolled from the eyes of the Prince; the
Emperor was sobbing.

Poonkuzhali saw the scene unfolding before her; she could guess what happened
in a few seconds. The assailant who threw a spear aimed at the Emperor knew
that Mandhakini bore it on herself and saved the Emperor. The assailant threw
whatever came to his hand to put off the lamp near the, Emperor’s bed.

The place had gone dark. The assailant jumped from the terrace, entered the bedchamber and attempted to stab the Emperor lying in the bed. The Empress knew
that the Emperor was in danger and she rushed towards him. The assailant
pushed her away to go near the bed. That was why the Empress screamed.

Then the assailant must have run through the entrance. He did not see Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar entering the room. He pushed him aside and ran away.

A part of Poonkuzhali wanted to run behind the assailant and kill him. But
another part of her wanted to be with her dying aunt. She could not bear to see
her aunt dying. She was in a state of turmoil. She neglected the fact that her aunt
was now lying on the lap of the Emperor. She ran towards her aunt, knelt by her
side and cried “Athai... Athai... “

“Oh Athai, whatever you predicted became true! I am a fool, Athai! I should not
have left you alone!”

But her aunt did not turn towards her. She ignored her presence. Her eyes were
focussed on the handsome face of the Emperor. Mandhakini did not even care to
look at Prince Arulmozhivarman who was holding her hand and crying silently.

When Poonkuzhali started to wail the Prince muffled his sobs and spoke to her
in a choked voice:

“Samudrakumari, what is this? Have you forgotten yourself? Have you forgotten
where you are?”

He stood up.

Poonkuzhali was now overcome by a sense of shame. She contained her grief
and stood up.

“Your Majesty, I don’t have anybody in this world but my aunt.” – She sobbed.

Prince Arulmozhivarman wiped the tears from his eyes.

“Poonkuzhali she is your aunt. But for me she is more than my mother. Several
times more precious than the mother who gave birth to me. She wanted to see
me and sent word through you. But she did not care to see me. Do you know the
reason? My father and my mother who had been separated for more than thirty
years have come together again. Who are we to stand between them?”

The Prince looked at everyone in the chamber including the Empress. He then
turned to Poonkuzhali and spoke again.

“Poonkuzhali, you have helped me many times in the past. But they were not
significant. But today you bestowed on me the greatest blessing of seeing the
reunion of my father and my mother. I will never forget this, Samudrakumari.

Just imagine the greatness of your Aunt! She saved my father from the
assailant’s spear. She lovingly bore the weapon on herself and gave her life to
save that of the Emperor. She saved the Emperor not once but twice.

When my father saw the spear on this blessed lady, he, who had not got up from
his bed for the past three years, got up and almost ran to her. That saved his life
for the second time. The assailant knew that his spear missed the mark. He put
off the lamps, came down to the room and made a second attempt on the
Emperor’s life.

As the Emperor had got up from his bed by that time the assailant’s mission was
frustrated. His hand knife got stuck to an empty bed.

Look at the woman who gave birth to me, my mother, Vanamadevi. See the
expression of surprise and wonderment in her eyes. She saw the spear piercing
through your aunt. She thought that the assailant might try again. She went
running to the Emperor. She wanted to sacrifice her life to save that of the
Emperor. She wanted to follow your aunt. She wanted to fall over my father’s
body and bear the knife on herself so that the Emperor would be saved. But she
could not see the Emperor on his bed. That was why she screamed. If only the
Emperor was in bed at that time I would have lost either my father or mother or
perhaps both.

Samudrakumari, do you know what your aunt has done to the Chozha Empire
and the Chozha clan? Do you realise the service she has done for this great
country? If the Emperor had been killed by the conspirator there would have
been chaos and civil war in the country and the Empire would have been
destroyed. The clan of Pazhuvettaraiyars would have been disgraced forever.
Your aunt did not just save the lives of my father and my mother. She has also
saved the honour of the Pazhuvettaraiyar family. She saved the Chozha Empire
from a great calamity. For what she has done she deserves to be worshipped as
the family deity of the Chozha clan. Yes, she is our Goddess, Poonkuzhali. The
Goddess of our family, our clan and our Empire.

I am not going to cry for her anymore. I am not going to shed even a drop of tear
for her. Why should I? You too are not going to cry for her. Her death is divine.
Tell me who else has been blessed with such a glorious end? Who else in this
world would give her life for her husband from whom she got separated more
than thirty years ago? Who else will have the bliss of lying on her beloved
husband’s lap during the last moments of her life?”

The Prince looked around.

Those inside the chamber and those standing near the door were listening to him.
The Prince continued.

“Poonkuzhali, please don’t think that you will be orphaned by the death of your
aunt. I will never forget what you have done for me today. I will be bound in
gratitude to you for eternity. Even if I fail in my gratitude and forget your help,
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar will never forget you. I don’t have words to describe
what you and your aunt have done for him today. If the spear or the knife had
been on the Emperor what will the world speak about the Junior? The whole
world would have said that the Commander of the Thanjavur Fort was an
accomplice of the murderer. The Kodumbalur Chieftain is waiting outside the
Fort ready to attack any time. He would have got enough reason to destroy the
Pazhuvur clan. Why go so far? If I had not acted on your suggestion and entered
the Fort by stealth I too would have suspected the intentions of Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. So of all the persons here, the Junior is the most indebted to
you. Whatever you ask he is bound to give. Even if you ask for half of his wealth
he will happily give it to you.”

The Prince was looking at the Junior while he spoke these stinging words. The
Prince wanted the Junior to understand that he had failed in his duty and used the
opportunity to sting him with his strong words. The Junior knew this. His face
was stricken with indescribable grief. The usual majesty in his face had
vanished. There was no trace of the nonchalant, fearless attitude that was

characteristic of him.

His face resembled that of a soldier who had run away from the battle field in
fear. And like that coward he was overwhelmed by a sense of shame.

Poonkuzhali who had melted in love when she heard what the Prince spoke in
the beginning was now the old ferocious Samudrakumari. She roared to the
Prince:

“I don’t want anybody’s gratitude, Your Majesty. I don’t want any reward from
anybody. I have the Sea-King. I will take refuge in him. My boat is safe at the
canal. I am leaving now. If my aunt survives.... no that’s asking for too much.
My aunt told me about her end in the morning. She knew what was coming. She
won’t survive this. I don’t have anything to do here. If some day you and the
Kodumbalur Princess come to Kodikkarai...”

Poonkuzhali stopped mid-sentence and threw a glance at Vanathi. Vanathi was
staring at the Prince and Poonkuzhali.

“If some day you and the Kodumbalur Princess come to Kodikkarai... What is
that... a foolish desire of a foolish girl. Ok, I am going now.”

Poonkuzhali walked fast towards the door.

Vanathi, who had been in a state of daze, suddenly became conscious of her
surroundings. She came near Poonkuzhali.

“Where are you going, my dear friend? I too am an orphan like you.”

Before Vanathi could continue in the same strain Poonkuzhali intervened.

“Devi, I am not your dear friend. And you are not an orphan. Princess Kunthavai
will be here soon.”

Only then Vanathi remembered Princess Kunthavai.

“Oh My God! Akka does not know these sudden developments. How am I going
to communicate to her?”

“That is not a problem, Princess. Your uncle, the Kodumbalur Chieftain, is
outside the Fort. If you pass on a word to him he will send somebody to
Pazhaiyaarai.”

Vanathi was trying to block Poonkuzhali’s way. Poonkuzhali pushed her away
and walked fast. Near the door her way was blocked again by Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“I heard the words of Prince Arulmozhivarman. What he says is perfectly true.
You saved our Pazhuvur clan from disgrace. My indebtedness to you is without
bounds. I will give you whatever you want. I promise”

Poonkuzhali responded with a sad smile:

“Commander, some of the people here are happy that the Emperor is saved.
Others are happy that he is able to walk again. Still others are happy because the
Pazhuvettaraiyars’ family has been saved from disgrace. It seems nobody is
worried about the death of my aunt. Let me be the only one grieving for her
death. I am now going to find assailant who killed her. Please move away.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was shocked by her words.

“I concede my defeat to you, Girl. I have been an idiot to have let him go free. If
I don’t arrest him I’ll still be disgraced. My disgrace will not go simply because
the Emperor is saved. I have been a perfect idiot to doubt your words and your
intentions. I lost precious time there.

Where would the assassin have gone? He must have gone only to the
underground passage. Come with me. I don’t want to take anybody with me. If
only I am able to catch him... well... he had it.”

The Junior grabbed Poonkuzhali’s hand with his iron grip and walked fast
towards the art gallery.

All the rest in the room had frozen in their places. They knew the Prince’s mind
and kept away from the Emperor.

All the eyes were on the Emperor and the lady lying on his lap.

Sundara Chozhan and Mandhakini were on a world of their own. There was no
space for anybody else in their world of love. Can a life of thirty years be lived
in a few minutes? How would the psychologists answer this question? But
Sundara Chozhan and Mandhakini lived thirty years of their lives in those few
minutes. Whatever they might have spoken during the last thirty years they
spoke to each other during those few minutes. Mandhakini being deaf and mute
spoke only through her eyes. The Emperor understood her language. He had
shared some of the happiest moments of his life with her in Ghost Island in
Srilanka. At that time he became proficient in understanding the sign language
of his beloved. And that proficiency remained with him even now. Mandhakini
spoke through her eyes; the Emperor could read the thoughts arising in her mind
at that time. Of course Mandhakini did not speak much.

“I have nothing against you. I am nobody in front of you. I have been avoiding
you all these years. But once in a while I got a glimpse of you from afar and was
contented with that. I never thought that I will have this unique blessing of dying
on your lap. What more do I want, my dear?”

That was all Mandhakini said through her eyes. But her eyes were repeating the
words several times. Her face wore an indescribable expression of bliss. There
was no sign of any sorrow or pain in her face. She had lost all thoughts about her
dying body. It was time for the bird to fly away from the cage. Why should the
bird worry about the cage, when it was going to soar high in the free skies?

Even the Emperor had forgotten about his ageing body. That was why he forgot
the inaction in his limbs and could run to Mandhakini. And that was why he was
saved from the second attempt on his life.

But unlike Mandhakini Sundara Chozhan’s part of conversation was not
confined to a few words. He was talking of so many things. Whatever words his

eyes spoke his lips also spoke, of course in an inaudible whisper. Nobody
present in the room could understand a word of what he spoke. But Mandhakini
understood every word and every syllable. When she agreed with the Emperor
she nodded her assent; when she differed she nodded her disagreement more
furiously. She felt happiness where it was called for; and she offered solace to
the Emperor when it was necessary.

“My love, my life! You have sacrificed your life for me today. How long do you
think I am going to live? Yes, I concede that I am a hard-hearted sinner. Those
who are born to rule have to harden their hearts. They do not have a choice.
Otherwise how will governance happen? The first sin I committed was to have
deserted you at Ghost Island. That led to many other sins. Ghost Island in Lanka
– I can’t think of a happier heaven than that. What a great life we lived there, my
dearest! It was not in our stars to continue that happy life. It was God’s
conspiracy against us. My people conspired against you and me. Soon after the
coronation of the Crown Prince, my son Adithya Karikalan, I planned to come in
search of you. I came till Kodikkarai. But those crooks told me that you jumped
into the sea and killed yourself. I thought Aniruddhan, the Chief Minister, is my
best friend. I never imagined that even he would deceive me. I know what you
want to say. You say that it is true that you jumped into the sea. And somebody
saved you at the nick of time. The Chief Minister knew that you were alive; but
he hid the fact from me. That resulted in all the disaster.

Whenever I happened to see you I thought it was your ghost haunting thirsting
for revenge. You saved my dear son from Cauvery; but in my madness I thought
that you were the one who pushed him into the river. If only I had known that you
were alive... Oh My God... how wonderful it would have been! Do you think that
I would have sacrificed you for the sake of this big Empire? Never.”

Finally the Emperor said:

“When you came before me two days ago I threw a burning lamp on you.

Whenever I saw you I showed nothing but disgust. You will have to forgive me,
my dearest. I was thinking that you came as a ghost only to torture me. You
appeared before me at midnight in the same room. I thought you were cursing
my children. The hatred I had for you was unabated till now.

You came as our Goddess. You came in only to save me and my people from
danger. I never knew that, my dear. I realised my folly only when my daughter
Kunthavai spoke about you. Oh My God! How I have wronged you! Please
forgive me for whatever I did to you. How will I show my love for you in future?
You have now sealed all the ways of expressing my love for you, my dear. You did
not want my sons to succeed me to the throne. Yes, I know, my dear. That is fair
and just. Why are you nodding your head as if you are refusing my words? You
suggested that only because you love me. The people here are trying to confuse
me. They are trying to make me take crazy decisions.

They say that you had a child. If it true please tell me now. I will do my best to
him as a kind of retribution of whatever I did to you. Please. .. my dearest...
pleases... “

Mandhakini understood the thoughts of the Emperor. She gazed at the Emperor
for a moment and then looked around as if she was looking for somebody. Her
eyes fell on Ponniyin Selvan. The Prince came near his father and mother and sat
by the side of Mandhakini.

Mandhakini touched the Prince and then looked at the Emperor’s handsome
face.

“He is my son.” Mandhakini roared through her eyes.

The Emperor understood.

Mandhakini looked at the Emperor and then at the Prince. She repeated the
action three times. And then she closed her eyes. Her head which was upright till
then tilted and slid down on the Emperor’s lap.

The caged bird was set free. Mandhakini’s life escaped from her body. Nobody
had seen the Emperor crying till then. But on that fateful day everybody was
shocked to see the Emperor sobbing and wailing.

Prince Arulmozhivarman was probably the only person who remained unshaken
at that time.

He addressed the Emperor:

“Father, you need not grieve over the death of my mother. She is alive. She has
become a Goddess. And she will be worshipped as the principal deity of our
Chozha Clan.”

Even these words could not pacify the Emperor who was still sobbing. Did he
cry for the death of Mandhakini or for another tragic event that happened far
away? Nobody could tell.

The consoling words spoken by Prince Arulmozhivarman however became true.
When the Prince later ascended the throne assuming the name Raja Raja
Chozhan he built a temple for Mandhakini whom he affectionately called as the

Lankan Queen. That was for a time popular as Sinhala Nachiar Temple. And
later over a period of time the name got twisted as Singachiar Temple. Even now
one can see the ruins of Singachiar Temple in Thanjavur.

Chapter 31: The Time Has Come!

The death of Mandhakini in her attempt to save the life of the Emperor marked
the end of an epoch. And that could have been a fitting finale to this epic story.
But unfortunately another tragedy happened in the Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar’s
palace almost at the same time. And that changed the story line and even the
course of history of Tamilnadu.

Nandini was pacing restlessly in the chambers allotted to her in the Kadambur
Palace. Her face betrayed the excitement of her heart. A lightning flashed across
her excited eyes. She was looking at the several entrances to her chamber. Her
eyes were trained to pick up the sound of footsteps coming from any of these
entrances. Her lips kept on murmuring the magic words, “The time has come.”
And her lips quivered as they repeated the incantation. Her eye-lids and eyebrows too quivered. And her whole body shivered like that of a person
possessed.

Her bed in the room was covered by beautiful silk curtains on all the four sides.
The curtains hid the cot and whatever was there on it. Nandini lifted the screen
on one side. She looked at the sword lying lengthwise on the bed. The weapon
glowed so much that for a moment it appeared as if it had been made of fire. It
was a matter of surprise that the sword did not burn the bed, cot and the silky
screen cloth. It was only from this that one drew an inference that that the killerinstrument was after all made of steel and not fire.

Nandini took charge of the sword. She lifted it high and tilted the sword to
reflect the light of the lamp. She was pleased with the dazzle. She then held the
sword close to her heart and spoke to it: “My dear divine sword! Time has come
for you to do your work, to complete your mission. I am sure you won’t let me
down. No, you won’t. My hands might let me down, not you, my dear sword.”

Then Nandini spoke to her hands: “My dear hands, will you be strong enough?
What is this? Why are you trembling? If you tremble now what the hell will you
do when it is time to strike? No. There is no point in trusting you. I need to
acquire two spare hands for carrying out my mission today.”

Suddenly Nandini’s body trembled in unbearable ecstasy. She looked through
her eyes that were sparkling with an undying thirst for revenge.

“Oh, you have come? Welcome. You have come at the right time. Come on, my
dear. My dear King, come on in. Come on, the severed head of Veera Pandiyan!
Why are you hiding in the corner of the roof? Come down. Nobody is here now
except your slave, Nandini. Why are you staring at me? Speak out. Didn’t you
say, ‘If we are saved from this danger I’ll make you sit on the Pandya throne?’ I
have not forgotten it. I have not forgotten the promise I made to you. Now the
time has come to act. Oh My God! I have been waiting for this for years and
years. How many roles I had to assume on the way to reach my goal! You were
watching everything. Look at me, Oh, the slain head of King Veera Pandiyan.
Don’t even bat your eye-lids.

I know you never bat your eye-lids. And you made sure that I did not have even
a wink of sleep all these years. Tonight after I take revenge for your death I hope
you will let me sleep peacefully. Will you? Or will you leave me only after I
ascend the Pandya throne? Didn’t you say that if I deliver on my promise you’ll
deliver on yours? No, no. I don’t want the throne. Nor do I want the Crown.
They brought a boy and claimed that he was your son. They made him ascend
the throne and even wear the crown.

And now if I take revenge on your behalf you will be pacified. I am sure you
will leave me at last. You will go to heaven, the highest of heavens reserved for
those who die valiantly on the battlefield. There you will find many women like

me. You choose one of them... What?... why do you refuse to do that?... Ok, ok.
Let us discuss that later. My love, I hear someone coming. Go into hiding. Let
me hide this sword.”

Footsteps were heard very close to the entrance. As Nandini was trying to keep
the sword back on the bed Manimekalai entered the room.

Nandini who looked possessed by evil spirits a few minutes ago changed
completely. She was the same sweet Nandini whom Manimekalai adored. She
welcomed the visitor in a soft voice.

“Oh, is that you, Manimekalai? Come on in.”

“Akka, why do you carry a sword in your hand all the time?”

“I don’t have a choice, dear. When men are crooks this is all I have to defend my
honour.”

“Devi, when I am here with you, do you need a sword? You don’t trust me,
Devi?”

“If I had not trusted you I would not have shared all my personal secrets with
you, Manimekalai. You are the only person I trust in this whole world. But even
then you can’t do anything against your blood brother. Can you?”

“Akka, I have made up my mind. He is not my brother. I don’t have a brother at
all. “

“But why, Manimekalai? In any case he is your own brother.... “

“Brother! Sister! All relationships are illusions, Devi. Kandhanmaran wants to
marry me off against my wishes, to gain political mileage. If he is a real brother
and if he loves me do you think he will stoop to that level?”

“My dear little sister, Manimekalai, he might want you to marry the Crown
Prince so that you can lead the life of a queen. He is doing it for your own
good.”

“My own good! My foot! He doesn’t even know what is good for me.”

“Your brother wants you to sit on the Chozha Throne as the Empress of a vast
Empire that extends from Lanka in the south to the banks of River Pennai in the
north. Tell me is it not for your good?”

“No, definitely not. He has a hidden agenda. If I became the Empress he can
become the Chief Minister. Or the Chancellor, like the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.
That’s his motive, Akka. And there is another thing... I don’t know... how... to...
“

“Come out with it, Manimekalai. You need not have any reservation with me.
Speak out your mind, my girl. Didn’t you say that you love me? I am sure you

spoke the truth.”

“You don’t have to suspect my words, Akka. There are only two persons in the
whole world whom I love. One is you.”

“Who is the other person?”

“You know him, Akka. Why do you ask me?”

“My dear little sister, I thought you will be happy to share that with me. Haven’t
you heard of love stories and epics? When a woman is in love she would like to
share it with somebody. That’s where her best friend comes in. Tell me, am I not
your best friend?”

“You are, Akka. And whatever you said is true. I have bared my heart to you
earlier. Let it wait. I have now come to share some sad news with you.”

Nandini was shocked.

“What is that?” Nandini almost shouted.

Nandini was afraid that her plans of several years might be frustrated by some
sudden unexpected development. Her face betrayed the fears in her heart.

“Akka, Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar has not yet reached Thanjavur. On the way... “

“What happened on the way? Did he change his mind and come back to
Kadambur?” Nandini’s fears came out in her words.

“It could have been better if he had returned. Do you remember the storm we
saw in the lake island? That storm was more intense near River Coleroon. When
Pazhuvettaraiyar was crossing Coleroon the storm was very strong.”

“Then?”

Nandini was still tense. But she was not as anxious as before.

“When the boat was about to reach the banks it capsized.”

“Oh, No!”

“Those who survived looked for Pazhuvettaraiyar all over the place. He was not
to be found.”

Manimekalai expected that Nandini would break down. She was ready to hold
her and offer words of consolation. Nandini was unshaken. She asked in a voice
devoid of any emotion: “How did you know?”

“A person who went with Pazhuvettaraiyar has come back. He was sharing the
news with my brother. I overheard. Akka, my brother was hesitant to break this
news to you. He sought the advice of the Crown Prince on this matter. But I
thought it concerns your life and you ought to know. So I came running.”

Manimekalai could not control her grief. She broke down into a sob. Nandini
hugged her.

“I know your love, my dear. But there is no need to grieve.”

Manimekalai looked startled.

‘This lady’s heart must be made of solid rock.’

Nandini read her thoughts.

“My dear little sister, you wanted to break the sad news to me and offer
consolation. But see now I have to console you. You need not grieve. I know for
sure that my husband is not in danger. If he is, my heart would have
communicated that to me. That was why the news did not shock me. Now I want
more details from you. Another doubt has arisen in my mind.”

“What doubt, Akka?”

“I am wondering whether your brother and that Pallava Prince are conspiring to

harm my husband. And they have manufactured this news as part of their
conspiracy.”

“I don’t get you, Akka. Why should they harm your husband?”

“You are still a child at heart, Manimekalai. Didn’t I tell you that your brother
and that Pallava Prince are lusting for me? Didn’t I tell you that I have this
sword only to ward off any danger from those two men?”

“You did, Akka. I even told you not to call Kandhanmaran as my brother any
more. I won’t consider that womaniser as my brother. Even then I am wondering
why they should plan to harm Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

“Elementary, my dear sister, quite elementary. I am married to an old man. They
think that if he dies I’ll be happy. And then I will yield to their lust. Had I known
the character of your brother I would not have kept him in my house and served
him as if he were my own brother. I would not have rescued him from the jaws
of death.”

“Akka, I won’t be away from you even for a second. If they come here with evil
intentions I will kill them with my own hands.”

“Manimekalai, you need not worry. I know how to defend myself. If
Kandhanmaran or Parthibendran try to come near me I will teach them a lesson
they won’t forget for their life. I was never afraid of them. I was a little afraid of
that ruffian, I mean the Crown Prince. Thank God, you saved me from him.”

“Me? Saved you? How?”

“Can’t you understand that you have stolen his heart? Manimekalai, the Crown
Prince pushed away Vandhiya Thevan and saved you from the lake. Why? I have
been watching him after that. Can’t you guess his mind, Manimekalai?”

“I know, Akka. I am afraid of the Crown Prince. When he comes near I tremble
in fear. That devil who calls himself my brother has been constantly bothering
me.”

“Bothering you? I mean, is he forcing you to marry the Crown Prince?”

“Yes. Only when he sees me alone he starts advising me. Just to put him off at
least....”

“Oh you want to marry the Prince just to put him off? Have you decided,
Manimekalai?”

“What is this, Akka? I never thought you’ll talk like this.”

Manimekalai broke down.

Nandini consoled her.

“Hey girl, I was just kidding. And you have started crying... “

Nandini wiped her tears.

Manimekalai was a little pacified.

Nandini spoke to her softly.

“Please look deep into your mind, dear. You don’t like the Crown Prince Adithya
Karikalan? Don’t you want to marry him and become the Empress of the great
Chozha Empire?”

“You ask me once; you ask me hundred times. My answer will be the same. No,
Akka. I am not interested.”

“Is it true that you have lost your heart to the warrior of the Vana clan, Vandhiya
Thevan?”

“Yes, Akka. But I don’t know what is in his mind.”

“That’s not the problem, dear. That question does not arise when he is not alive.”

Manimekalai was shocked.

“Akka, what are you saying?”

“Manimekalai, you don’t know anything about the bitter realities of life. You
don’t know your state or that of your beloved. You are worried about me and my
husband. You need not worry about us. I know who my husband is. If he speaks
the whole Empire will listen. If he orders the country will obey. Emperor
Sundara Chozhan will never go against his words. The Emperor won’t listen
even to the Chief Minister if he speaks against my husband. The Emperor won’t
listen even to his own family. There are fools like your brother who ridicule my
husband for his age. Take it from me if my husband breathes hard a hundred
young men like your brother and that Pallava Prince would fall down. Nobody
can harm Pazhuvettaraiyar. And I know how to save myself. I have been caught
in worse situations and have come out of them all unscathed. You know I am
worried only about you now. ‘This girl loves me. I don’t want this poor creature
to be hurt on any account.’ This is the only thought and the only prayer in my
mind now. When you entered the room some time ago I was thinking only about
you.”

“I don’t understand, Akka. What danger can come to me? Who can harm me?”

“Silly girl! There is no greater harm than being forced into a marriage with a
man you hate.”

“That will never happen.”

“Your brother has decided to marry you off to the Crown Prince. Even your
father has consented to the match.”

“Their decision and consent mean nothing to me. I will never agree to that
match.”

“When are you going to grow up, dear? Nobody asks for the consent of the
daughters of Chieftains. Their marriages are decided as part of an overall
strategic alliance package. And if the first born of the great Emperor, the Crown
Prince wants to marry you do you think anybody can object to it? Even you
cannot do anything about it.”

“I can. Why not? I will talk to the Crown Prince.”

“What will you tell him?”

“That I don’t want to marry him.”

“If he asks for the reason?”

“I’ll tell the truth. I’ll tell him that I’ve lost my heart to his friend Vandhiya
Thevan.”

“Foolish girl! You need not say that. They already know.”

“Then why the hell are they forcing me into a marriage I don’t like? And if they

force me beyond a limit... Akka, I too have a knife.”

She pulled out a small knife from her waist and showed it to Nandini.

“My dear sister, your innocence in this matter makes me cry and laugh at the
same time.”

“Have I done anything wrong, Akka?”

“You think anybody is going to force you on this? Not at all. You think anybody
is going to ask your consent for this marriage? Not at all. Nobody is going to ask
you. They will simply eliminate the reason that blocks your marriage with the
Crown Prince.”

“I don’t get you, Akka.”

“Your beloved is in danger. He will be killed by these people.”

“Oh My God!”

“Your brother hates his former friend. The Chieftains held an assembly in this
Palace sometime ago. Vandhiya Thevan told that to the Crown Prince. That
makes your brother hate him. Your brother thinks that it was Vandhiya Thevan
who stabbed him in the back. For another different reason Parthibendran is
furious over your beloved.”

“My beloved is a warrior. This fury and hatred cannot do anything to him.”

“What if he is a great warrior? If he is ambushed by armed killers all of a sudden
what can an unarmed warrior do against them?”

“You mean to say that they will kill him?”

“Not just kill him. They will slice his body into pieces and feed the dogs and
jackals.”

“Oh My God!”

“You can’t even think of it. Tell me if it happens how will you bear it?”

“Akka, my soul is trembling already. Do you think they will do that? Isn’t he the
close friend of the Crown Prince?”

“Haven’t you heard of close friends turning into dangerous foes? Your brother
and Parthibendran are carrying tales to the Prince about Vandhiya Thevan. They
have tarnished his image.”

“Devils! But, Akka, how do you know... “

“Parthibendran came here to meet me this morning on the pretext of taking leave
of me.”
“Where is he going?”

“Not far. Didn’t you hear that Thirukkovilur Malaiyaman is marching towards
Kadambur with a huge army?”

“Yes, I did. I was wondering what provoked that old man to take that extreme
step.”

“You. You are the reason for his invasion. The Crown Prince hinted about the
invasion in his conversation with your brother and Parthibendran this morning. It
seems that the Crown Prince has told them “If I don’t get to marry Manimekalai
I’d raze this Fort and Palace to the ground as soon as Malaiyaman’s army comes
in.”

“Your brother told him, “We are ready, Prince. We don’t stand between you and
Manimekalai. Your friend Vandhiya Thevan does.” The Prince then roared,
“Can’t you remove him from the scene?” Your brother responded, “If you order
Prince, we’ll remove him.” I sweet-talked Parthibendran into giving details of
their plans. Your beloved Vandhiya Thevan is in danger. Unless you do
something you will lose your husband even before marriage.”

Manimekalai’s body shivered in fear and fury.

“Oh My God! I need to caution him.”

“Yes, you can caution him. But didn’t you say that he is a pure warrior? Do you
think he will run away if you warn him of the dangers? No, he won’t. He will be
more stubborn. He would prefer to stay back and fight rather than running away
from the battle-field.”

“You will have to help me, Akka. Please advise me, Akka. I feel dizzy. I don’t
know what I should do.”

“I was thinking of that when you came here. I also don’t know what is to be
done. Thank God you brought some news. I have got an idea now to save
Vandhiya Thevan.”

“From the news I brought? What news?”

“Didn’t you tell me that Pazhuvettaraiyar’s boat sank in the river and there’s no
news about him?”

“Yes, I did.”

“Using that as a pretext I will plead, beg, pray Vandhiya Thevan to go to
Coleroon to look out for my husband. You too plead on my behalf. When two
women plead for mercy he won’t refuse. The only way to save his life is to send
him out of this Palace as fast as possible. Once he is gone you can speak to your
father, your brother and even the Crown Prince. I will also speak for you. I shall

tell the Prince ‘It does not behove a person born in the Chozha clan to force a
girl into a marriage she does not like.”

“If they don’t listen to you then I have my knife.”

“That is all right. Now we have to first expel your man from this place and try to
save his life. If you cannot go to him send your friend Chandramathi. Or
Idumban Kari. Try to bring him here somehow.”

“Even if he agrees to go how will he get out of this place? My brother won’t let
him go.”

“Why should your brother know at all? Do you remember Manimekalai that he
shocked you first by coming through this underground passage? Let us send him
out through the same passage. Fast. Every second Vandhiya Thevan stays inside
this Fort he is risking his life. We can never know when the assassins hired by
your brother would attack him.”

“I am going now, Akka. I will come back only with him.”

Manimekalai left the chambers.

As soon as the sound of her footsteps became faint Nandini heard a knock on the
door that opened into the Hunting Hall.

Nandini went near the secret door, and opened the small inner door.

She had a glimpse of an ugly, gory face.

“Sorcerer, have you come already?”

“I have, Queen. And the time has come too.”

Chapter 32: The Final Phase

Nandini turned around and walked in the opposite direction to bolt the main door
to her room. She took a lamp, opened the secret door to the Hunting Hall and
entered in.

Sorcerer Ravidasan’s face was hideous already. It was made more so by the
wounds he got on his face and head.

Nandini asked him.

“What is this Sorcerer, I see new wounds on your body?”

“Queen, why should you be surprised about the wounds? Do you think that we
take tasty food at regular intervals and spend our time on soft, silky beds like
you people do? It is a big surprise that Parameswaran and I are alive today. I
should say that the spirit of our Pandya Emperor saved us.”

“No, Ravidasa, not at all. His spirit is with me all the time. It appeared before me
a few minutes ago and asked me whether I was going to fulfil my vow.”

“What was your answer, Devi?”

“I told him that I will fulfil my vow today or else I will kill myself.”

“We came here at the right time, Devi. What is the point in your killing yourself
at the last moment? We should succeed in our mission. So if you can’t do it.... “

“Who told you so? I will fulfil my vow and then kill myself.”

“No, Devi. Please don’t do that. After you fulfil your vow you have a lot to do.
We should have a grand coronation ceremony for Veera Pandiyan’s son at
Madurai. The whole world should know that he is the Pandya King...”

“You take care of that. My task will be over tonight. And so will be my life.”

“Queen, the wealth in Pazhuvettaraiyar’s treasure should be moved to the
mountains. We need your help for that.”

“You want me to go on deceiving my husband even after the vow is fulfilled?”

“Who is your husband, Devi?”

“The One who married me before the eyes of the world, the One who did not
mind being ridiculed by the people for having married a young woman and the
One who has been helping me in fulfilling my vows. I am referring to that great
man.”

“Oh Queen, Pazhuvettaraiyar is not your husband. Every night Veera Pandiyan
comes in my dream and urges me to treat you as his Empress.”

“Sorcerer, let us not talk about him now. Tell me how you got these wounds.”

“Yesterday night in a forest on the banks of River Coleroon an old tiger attacked
me. Though the tiger was old its claws and teeth were pretty sharp.”

“How did you escape from the beast?”

“Do you remember the War Memorial where we conducted the coronation
ceremony of the Pandya King’s son? Well, we pushed a part of the dilapidated
memorial on the tiger and we escaped.”

“It is a pity that you cannot even fight an old tiger face to face.”

“We concede, Devi, we could not. How could we then hope to fight a young
tiger like Adithya Karikalan face to face? That is why we are relying on tricks
and sorcery. Devi, if we miss the opportunity tonight we might never get it again.
If news about Sundara Chozhan and Arulmozhivarman leak out then Adithya
Karikalan will never come into our hands again.”

“Sorcerer, do you know anything about them – I mean the Emperor and
Arulmozhivarman?”

“They should have been killed by now. I am sure.”

“When Devaralan and you went to Srilanka you told the same thing. But nothing
happened.”

“That crazy dumb woman followed us and thwarted all our plans.”

“You said that Vandhiya Thevan died in the sea. He is alive.”

“We could have killed him at the War Memorial. But you didn’t let us do that.”

“There was a reason for that.”

“Whatever may be the reason he is guarding Adithya Karikalan like an
impenetrable iron armour.”

“You don’t have to worry about it.”

“I will have to, Devi. If it doesn’t happen today it won’t happen at all. Tell me
what arrangements have you done. Tell us what we should do.”

“It would have been very helpful to me if you people had not come here.”

“Impossible, Devi.”

“That means you do not trust me.”

“We have come here because we trust you. Once the vow is fulfilled we want to
take you back to safety. If something unexpected happens we are prepared for
that. You can call us anytime.”

“I am sure my plan will work without any glitch. Once the vow is fulfilled I
don’t want to live.”

“No, not at all. You will have to come with us. Or else... “

“Once the vow is fulfilled I won’t live in Pazhuvettaraiyar’s house even for a
minute.”

“Then you can come with us.”

“How will you take me from here?”

“At the end of this underground passage there is an Ayyanar Temple. We have

kept the Pazhuvur palanquin in the forest near the temple. Idumban Kari has
brought the palanquin in the pretext of repairing it. It will be an honour for us to
bear the noble woman who has avenged the death of Veera Pandiyan. We can
reach Kolli Hills before dawn.”

“How many people are here now?”

“Four.”

Ravidasan clapped. The conspirators who were hidden behind the stuffed
animals in that hall showed their head.

“Where is Parameswaran?” – Nandini asked.

“I have made him stand outside. A Kalamuka was in penance at the Ayyanar
temple. He was a nuisance and we had to struggle to drive him away. I have
posted Devaralan at the temple gates to make sure that the Kalamuka does not
come again.”

“Why should we worry about some Kalamuka? Do you have any news on Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar?”

Ravidasan was shocked.

“What news?”

“He left for Thanjavur. As he was crossing River Coleroon his boat sank due to
storm. Sambuvaraiyar has got news that Pazhuvettaraiyar did not reach the banks
and that he was drowned in the river.”

“Oh My God! You never told us about this till now.”

“I don’t believe that, Sorcerer. I don’t think Pazhuvettaraiyar would have died in
the river.”

“I too don’t believe that, Queen.”

“What if he swam to this bank? What if he comes here tonight? I am worried.”

“You need not worry about that, Queen. I now remember. I saw somebody on the
other side of Coleroon. He appeared hefty and majestic. He did not have the
usual dress or ornaments. It was dark and so we could not recognise him. Now
when I corroborate with this news I think that he might be the Senior.”

“There is absolutely no chance of his coming here tonight?”

“No way. You can relax, Devi. Now tell me. What are my orders?”

“Sorcerer, patience is the key word. You should wait here. Whatever may happen

in my chambers, whatever voices you may hear, you should not come in. And if
you do, all our plans will go up in smoke. Come in only when I call you.”

“How will you call us, Queen?”

“Sorcerer, you know that it has been aeons since I laughed. You would not have
heard me laugh.”

“Devi, only once when you were talking with that crook Vandhiya Thevan I
heard you laugh.”

“Oh, you remember even that! Good. If you hear me laugh aloud today you
come to my room through the secret door. That is the sign that the mission has
been accomplished. I might be laughing with Vandhiya Thevan today also.”

“Devi, I could guess what’s in your mind.”

“Give it some time. Everything will be fine. If there is any glitch in the plan, if
there is an unexpected development you will hear my cry. Come in
immediately.”

“We will do as instructed, Queen. But I don’t want to see you crying. I always
want to see you laughing.”

Chapter 33: OH MY GOD! A GHOST!

Vandhiya Thevan was pacing in the garden attached to the Kadambur Palace. He
was exhausted. His mind refused to think.

The garden was near the outer wall of the Fort. The nocturnal flowers had just
blossomed. The winter winds brought him the giddy fragrance of Jasmine, rose,
parijatha and mullai flowers.

“I should have been in Pazhaiyaarai at this time. How sweet it will be to hear
the sound of Kunthavai’s anklets! Here I am trapped in this Kadambur Palace,
caught in the grip of a mad Prince.”

The Crown Prince had spit venom on him in the evening. “Don’t ever come
before me again. I will tell what I am going to do with you tomorrow morning.”

Vandhiya Thevan was hurt. Why should the Prince be furious with him?

‘But what is the use in blaming the Crown Prince? He is in a confused state.

Vandhiya Thevan pitied the Prince.

Adithya Karikalan’s frenzy had touched new heights on that day. Unbridled

enthusiasm, total exhaustion, uncontrollable anger, boundless joy, sweet
friendliness, bitter hostility – Karikalan was tormented by a bundle of such
contradictory states of mind. In turn Karikalan tortured those who were with him
during the time. People with him were trembled as to what would be the mood of
the Crown Prince the next moment.

Right since morning the Crown Prince had been receiving disturbing news
which only served only to fan his fury. The first news was brought in by his host,
Sambuvaraiyar. It concerned Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman, the Prince’s
grandfather. He was planning to invade Kadambur with a huge army.
Sambuvaraiyar did not fail to condemn the action of the old man.

“Malaiyaman is a very old man. He has crossed 80. Are you still afraid of him?”
– The Crown Prince taunted Sambuvaraiyar.

“Your Majesty, we hail from the clan of Valvil Ori of Kolli Hills. We do not
know what is meant by fear. I am a little hesitant because you are visiting us
now. Give us a nod. We will show the old man... ..”

“You are ever ready to fight with an old man. Is that a sign of valour? Listen,
Sambuvaraiyar. It was I who sent word to my grandfather to come in with an
army.”

“Why, Your Majesty?”

“I am caught with you all alone. If something happens to me... “

“Prince, if you have any doubt then you can, at this very second. ... “

“Do you want me to leave your place...? “

“No, no. This is your Kingdom. This is your Palace. Chozha’s tiger flag is flying
on the top of this Palace. Who am I to send you away from here? So if you give
us permission then I and my family will vacate this Palace. You can bring in
your grandfather and stay happily with him.”

“So you mean to say that you, a descendant of Valvil Ori, are fearless while I,
hailing from the great Vijayaalaya Chozha’s clan am a coward.”

“The whole world knows your valour, Prince. When you were just twelve you
entered the Sevur Battlefield and destroyed the enemy’s army. When you were
just eighteen you chased Veera Pandiyan, found him hiding in a remote place,
cut off his head and brought that as a trophy.”

These words of praise touched a raw nerve in the Crown Prince.

“I know, I know. I know you are making fun of me because I was chasing a
person who was running for his life. I know you are ridiculing me because I cut
the head of a dead man. I know that the Pazhuvur Devil has spread all the
rumours.”

The Crown Prince’s laugh was frightening.

Sambuvaraiyar felt bad of having initiated the conversation with the hysterical
Prince.

“Your Majesty, today is not my day. Whatever I say does not seem right. Please
do whatever you wish to do. Please let me go.”

“You may go now. But if you have any idea of leaving this Fort, forget it. Nor
am I going to leave the Fort till I know the truth behind the conspirators’
assembly held inside the Fort four months ago. Nor will I let you go.”

Sambuvaraiyar’s lips quivered. His body shivered. There were tears in his eyes.

Parthibendran saw the condition of Sambuvaraiyar and interceded on his behalf.

“Your Majesty, the Chozha clan is as much known for its sense of fairness as for
its valour. I am afraid that you are not fair to this elderly Chieftain. You hurt him
with your stinging words. Sambuvaraiyar has already explained the
circumstances in which the assembly of Chieftains was held here. And you have
accepted his explanation. Since you refused to become the King and refused to
go to Thanjavur, the Capital City, the Chieftains, worried about the well-being of
the Empire held discussion regarding the possible successor to the Chozha
Throne. If you agree to succeed your father why should they think of anybody
else in your place? When the world-famous Adithya Karikalan is ready to
govern the country they won’t, even in their wildest dreams, consider
Madhuranthakan for the post.”

Adithya Karikalan laughed again.

“Yes, you are right. So long as I am alive it will be impossible for anybody to
ascend the Chozha Throne. That is why they want to finish me off here.”

The Crown Prince laughed again before emitting fire on his close friend.

“Parthibendra, do you think that I don’t know that you too have joined hands
with these people? Do you remember the time when you, Kandhanmaran and I
went for hunting? Do you think I didn’t know that you were aiming your spear at
me ready to attack me any time? But for my true friend Vandhiya Thevan who
came here at the nick of time you would have killed me by this time.”

Parthibendran stared at Vandhiya Thevan as if he wanted to kill him by merely
staring at him.

“Your Majesty, I am sure this crook should have said something to poison your
mind against me. If he proves here that I thought of betraying you I will this very
second... ..”

“How can he prove the betrayal in your thoughts? Seduced by the words of that
devil Nandini you took great efforts to bring me here. Can you refute this on my
face?”

“No, Prince. I am not refuting that. And there is no need to refute that. I know
for sure that the Pazhuvur Queen has all the good intentions. Her motive is to
bring you here, get you married to Kandhanmaran’s sister and thereby avoid any
possibility of civil war in the Empire. Nothing can make us happier than seeing

the Chozha Crown on your most worthy head. If Vandhiya Thevan speaks
wrongly about me I will tolerate his words as a former friend. But if he speaks ill
of the Pazhuvur Queen I will kill him with this sword right now.”

Parthibendran unsheathed his sword.

“Oh my dear valiant friend, put back the sword in its case. I’ll tell you when you
should take it out again. Vandhiya Thevan never accused the Pazhuvur Queen.
He too looks lost like you guys. In fact he has been swearing again and again
that Pazhuvur Queen is my own sister. He has come running all the way only to
reveal that great truth to me. He is not accusing the Pazhuvur Queen; but he is
accusing you. You took my brother Arulmozhivarman on your ship from Lanka.
He says that on the way you pushed my brother into the sea and killed him.
What is your answer for that charge?”

"Let me answer on behalf of Parthibendran, Prince.” – Kandhanmaran entered
the room with these words.

“Prince, I am bearing very happy news for you. Prince Arulmozhivarman is
alive. He was hiding in the Choodamani Monastery all these days. When the sea
entered the coastal town of Nagapattinam he had to come out of the Monastery.
He is now headed to Thanjavur. Thousands of people are going with him.”

Kandhanmaran thought that the news would make the Crown Prince happy. He
was disappointed. Karikalan’s fury was now directed towards Vandhiya Thevan.

“What? Arulmozhivarman is heading for Thanjavur? And that too with
thousands of people? What for? Vandhiya Theva! What did you say? What is

happening now? Didn’t you say that Arulmozhivarman will be in Nagapattinam
till he knows about my views on the question of succession? Why the hell is he
marching towards Thanjavur now?”

Vandhiya Thevan’s voice was very weak and soft.

“Your Majesty, I just repeated the words of Princess Kunthavai. She was very
sure on that. I don’t know what prompted the Prince to take this decision. Shall I
go to Thanjavur and find out... “

“So you also want to leave me? Good. You have all become my enemies. I know
your treacherous plans. I know why Arulmozhi is headed for Thanjavur. Now
that’s the conspiracy of Kodumbalur Chieftain. The old man wants to marry off
his niece to my brother and make her the Queen of Chozha Empire. I heard that
the Kodumbalur Chieftain too has approached Thanjavur with the Southern
Regiment. I am sure my sister Princess Kunthavai is also a part of this
conspiracy. And you too, Vandhiya Theva.”

“Forgive me, Your Majesty. Neither Ponniyin Selvan nor Princess Kunthavai has
such thoughts. That is the truth. If you want I will go there to find out the truth.”

“Oh, you want to go there and take active part in their conspiracy.
Kandhanmaran, arrest this crook and put him in an underground prison if you
have any.”

Kandhanmaran went near Vandhiya Thevan with a glee.

Before he could touch him the Crown Prince changed his mind.

“No, don’t do that. People of the Chozha Clan never falter in fairness and justice.
They will never punish anybody till the guilt is proved. Vandhiya Theva, don’t
see me again. I don’t want to see you at all. That is the punishment I am giving
you right now. I will tell you tomorrow whether you will be sent to Thanjavur or
to jail. Don’t stand here even for a second more. Get out of here.”

Vandhiya Thevan saw the face of the Crown Prince. There was a strange
expression in the corner of his eyes. ‘This is part of the game I am playing. Play
along.’ The Prince’s eyes seemed to tell Vandhiya Thevan. Nevertheless he
decided that it would be better if he kept away from the hysterical Prince.

“Your wish is my command, Your Majesty.” Vandhiya Thevan hurried out of that
room.

Later in the afternoon Vandhiya Thevan came to know that Sambuvaraiyar and
Parthibendran went out of the Fort to receive Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman and
bring him inside the Fort. He also came to know that Kandhanmaran and the
Crown Prince were talking for a long time.

All these developments made Vandhiya Thevan‘s mind depressed.

‘What will be his orders for me tomorrow? Will he send me to Thanjavur? Or
will he make me visit Pazhaiyaarai on the way? Oh , I would love to do that. I
hate living in this Kadambur Palace. Nobody is happy here. Everybody here
looks desolate and lost. And after sunset the Palace does not look like a place
where human beings live. Once darkness sets in the Palace looks like the home

of all the evil spirits and ghosts. The Palace is haunted. When can I leave this
cursed Palace?

Vandhiya Thevan’s thoughts were interrupted by a girl’s scream.

“A GHOST! A GHOST!”

Chapter 34: PLEASE GO AWAY!

"A GHOST! A GHOST!”

Vandhiya Thevan heard a girl’s scream and instinctively ran in the direction of
the sound. His mind was thinking fast as he was running:

“I am sure this is Manimekalai’s voice. What is she doing here at this time?
What did she see? Why did she scream? Ghosts do not exist, I am sure. Then
what made her scream? I could sense a raw fear in her voice. Will I be in trouble
if I approach her now? Her brother wants to eat me alive. The Crown Prince is in
a state of murderous frenzy. What diabolic plans are there in the mind of
Nandini, I do not know.”

All these thoughts appeared in quick succession in his disturbed mind. Naturally
he was distracted. He tripped on the roots of a tree and fell down. His upper
garment was caught in a flower bush.

Vandhiya Thevan struggled hard to sit up. He steadied himself. He tried to
retrieve his garment tangled in the bush. He looked at the roots of the tree with
disdain. They had done what his enemies could not do. They have made him fall
down. Was that a bad omen? Or, have these roots saved me from a greater
disaster?

"Amma, Amma, where are you?”

Vandhiya Thevan heard the voice of Chandramathi, Manimekalai’s personal
maid.

“I am here, dear. Near the lily pond. Come fast.”

The sound of footsteps was heard. They were mixed with the sweet clinking
sound of anklets and other ornaments worn by a woman.

What called as Lily Pond was a small artificial pond with a marble flooring in
the centre of the garden near the artificial mountain. The pond had been made in
the shape of a lily flower. There were a few lilies and Sengazhuneer creepers in
the pond. There were a few flowers too. Vandhiya Thevan had seen that pond
earlier. He now realised that he should have fallen near the pond. Thank God, the
two women had not noticed him. If only they had seen him falling they would
have laughed and it would have been a humiliation to him. Now that
Chandramathi had come to give company to Manimekalai he could slip away
from the place without the women knowing about it.

Vandhiya Thevan heard the women talking.

“Amma, why did you scream? What frightened you?”

“See that wall. I saw something over it. There was a figure with a long hair and a
thick beard covering its face. On its neck – I can’t shudder to describe what I
saw – there was a garland of human skulls. As soon as I screamed the figure
vanished.”

“Very good, Princess. It is a hallucination. There are no ghosts in this world. It is
impossible for anybody to scale this high wall and sit on it.”

“No. I have never hallucinated in the past. I have never seen ghosts and spirits.”

“I know, Princess. You see only the face of a handsome young man, in your
dream as well as in reality.”

“Naughty girl, is this the time to tease me?”

“Then when can I tease you, Princess? It is a beautiful evening. You are waiting
near a beautiful lily pond in a beautiful garden of flowers. The place is pervaded
by the strong fragrance of I flowers. You were expecting to see the Prince of
Vallam. But your bad luck, a bearded ghost came in his place.”

“And as if to add to my woes you too have come.”

“Perhaps the ghost was scared of me. It is known throughout the world that if the
ghosts and ghouls chance to see Chandramathi, the maid attached to Kadambur
Palace, they would run for their lives.”

“Chandramathi, this is not the time for small talk. I did see an apparition, a
horrible figure over the wall. You don’t have to believe it. Tell me, have you
finished the work I gave you?”

“The mission failed, Princess.”

“Why? Why?”

“I could see only the Pallava Prince and the Kadambur Prince talking to each
other in a hush-hush voice. I could not see the Prince of Vallam.”

“Perhaps he has been sent away on some work.”

“Not possible. Your father and the Pallava Prince have gone out to welcome
Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman. I enquired Idumban Kari. He told me that the
Crown Prince was furious with the Prince of Vallam.”

“The Crown Prince has lost his mind. He is furious with everybody. Ok, then?”

“The Crown Prince shouted at him: “Don’t come before me today. Meet me in
the morning.” The Prince of Vallam was sent away with these harsh words.”

“Where should he have gone?”

“He should be hiding somewhere inside the walls of this palace. That is why I
said; perhaps he dressed himself up as a ghost to scare you.”

“No. I know there are many persons in this palace who can act and camouflage
their real self under a disguise. I am sure that this man is not like that.”

“This is how we innocent girls get cheated by men.”

“Ok, let that be so. You look out for the Prince of Vallam. He should be
somewhere inside the Palace. Take the help of Idumban Kari if needed.”

“Princess, I want to tell you something. I hate this guy, Idumban Kari. His eyes
are not all right. Honestly I am afraid of him.”

“Hey, what happened to you? You are not afraid of ghouls and ghosts. But you
are afraid of Idumban Kari. That’s all right. In a way it is better not to tell him
anything. You look for him one more time.”

“Till then... “

“I will be here.”

“What if the bearded ghost comes again?”

“I will tell your name and drive the ghost away.”

Vandhiya Thevan heard the clinking sound of jewels. He guessed that
Chandramathi was going away from the place.

Vandhiya Thevan had heard the conversation in full. He was assailed by many
thoughts at the same time. The foremost was, ‘Who could have come as a ghost
and frightened Manimekalai?’ He remembered Azhwarkkadian who had once
come in the guise of a Kalamuka to save him from danger.

‘Perhaps he appeared on the palace wall dressed as a Kalamuka with a garland
of skulls! But why should he come here? Is he looking for me? Has he brought
news for me from Thanjavur? Probably he doesn’t want to be recognised by the
people in the Palace. That’s why he has come in disguise.

Why is Manimekalai eager to see me? Why did she send for me?’

Vandhiya Thevan tried to guess what was there in Manimekalai’s mind. That
was the reason he always kept away from her. He did not want to further fan the
fire of enmity with Kandhanmaran. That was another reason he maintained a
safe distance from Manimekalai.

‘But that silly girl is now alone in the palace garden and has sent for me. Unless
there is an emergency she would not have taken the risk of meeting me. Poor
girl! Perhaps she too is in trouble! Nandini might have sent some message to
him through her. Oh My God! Everyone in Kadambur Palace now has a hidden
agenda. Whatever Manimekalai said a little while ago is true. Everyone is hiding
under some guise. Everyone is wearing a mask. This innocent girl Manimekalai
is caught in a herd of treacherous sharks. Nandini may use Manimekalai for her
evil design. Manimekalai should have smelt a fish. She must have sensed some
danger. Perhaps that is the reason she is seeking my help.

Vandhiya remembered how that sweet, innocent girl helped him once. His heart
was filled with gratitude. And if that girl is in real trouble, and seeks his help, to
refuse it will be a crime of ingratitude. It was prudent to know what was
happening. Her maid Chandramathi was not there. Manimekalai was alone. She
might try to him again. If he can get out of this deceitful palace with her help it
would be all the more better. It was therefore wise to get to know the truth from
Manimekalai.

Manimekalai was seated on a marble bench near the lily pond. Like the shining
stars scattered over clouded skies a few flowers were seen in the middle of the
leaves that almost covered the whole pond. In the darkness that was enveloping
the garden pretty fast the whiteness of those flowers stood out. Beyond the pond
were seen mullai buds and flowers - they shone like white pearls set against a
blue frame.

Manimekalai was lost in that beautiful sight. She turned around, startled by the
sound of footsteps. When she saw a human figure she was shocked, lost her
balance and was about to fall in the pond.

"Princess, it’s me.” Vandhiya Thevan proclaimed himself and held Manimekalai
in his hands at the same time.

Manimekalai shivered in ecstasy. Out of her instinctive shyness she tried to push
his hands away and get herself released from his grip. But she did not have the
strength or the mind to do so. Her feeble attempts to move away from him only
made her move further backwards.

Vandhiya Thevan tightened his grip on her and brought her forward.

Manimekalai struggled hard and steadied herself.

“Leave me alone. Don’t touch me.” She screeched.

Vandhiya Thevan took off his hand.

“I am sorry, Princess. Please forgive me.”

Manimekalai’s excitement was still high. Her voice was choked.

“Why should I forgive you?”

“I appeared suddenly and shocked you.”

“Yes, you came suddenly. Agreed. But tell me why did you hold me?”

Vandhiya Thevan knew that Manimekalai was back to her usual mischievous
self.

“I saved you from falling into the pond.”

“Wonderful. But on the other day when I was drowning in the lake you were not
concerned. Now you have to save me from falling into a pond which has but
knee-deep water. What an irony!”

“The fault is mine”

“You are blemishless. I am the one to be blamed.”

“How come? You have not done anything wrong. Perhaps you are angry with
me. That’s why you made that sarcastic statement.”

“Long back you barged into my room from the Hunters’ Hall. You shocked me
on that day. I should have screamed and had you caught by my father’s men.”

“You saved my life on that day. I will never forget that help.”

“Nor can I forget the way you showed your gratitude. I have never seen anyone
so ungrateful.”

“That’s a grave charge, Princess. Please explain.”

“Didn’t you say that some killers are stalking you? I went into the Hunters’ Hall
to find out who they were. Before I came back you vanished from the scene like

a thief.”

“Did you say like a thief?”

“Why like a thief? You are a thief.”

“Princess, you will never know what kind of situation I was in on that day.”

“You could have explained. Who prevented you from doing that?”

“Your friend Chandramathi. As soon as you entered the Hunters’ Hall she came
through the other door. I had to hide myself in the granary.”

“From there you vanished.”

“No. I climbed up the stairs, walked across the terrace, scaled the palace wall
and then went away. If only somebody had seen me on that day my mission
would have been spoilt. And your name would have been tarnished.”

“Why should you bother about my name being tarnished?”

“I am concerned, Princess.”

“If that’s so you could have explained why you ran away on that day. It has been
ages since you came back to the Palace.”

“I have been waiting for the right opportunity, Princess.”

“Empty words. Lame excuses. You don’t even look in my direction.”

“Sister.. “

“I am not your sister.”

“You are my friend Kandhanmaran’s sister. That makes you my sister as well.”

“Kandhanmaran is not my brother. Nor is he your friend. He is our common
enemy – the worst enemy one could have.”

“Princess, you seem to know everything. Till a few months ago Kandhanmaran
was my best friend. He has now become my worst enemy. Parthibendran is
biding his time to kill me Adithya Karikalan’s moods are changing every minute.
At one time he is all love. In the next minute he spits venom. I spend my time
wondering what danger will come from whom the next moment. If I come
looking for you to express my gratitude now.. “

“I am happy that you are so keen on saving yourself.”

“Princess, I am not worried about me or my life. I am worried that you should
not be hurt because of me.”

“And that worry has shaken you, right? That concern has made you melt for me,
right? Chandramathi used to say that all men are cheats. Only now I understand
that it is true.”

“Let them say whatever they want. I shall never forget you or your help so long
as I shall live.”

Manimekalai thought for a while before she responded.

“Will you please repeat your words one more time?”

“Why once, I’ll repeat it a thousand times. I shall never forget you or your help
so long as I shall live.”

Vandhiya Thevan’s words were firm.

“What’s the big deal in repeating the words a thousand times? Should you not try
to make them come true?”

“Tell me how I should try, Princess.”

“You will be grateful so long as you shall live. So the first priority is to save your
life. If not for you at least for me you will have to save your life.”

“What is this, Princess?”

“Please tell me truth. Didn’t you overhear the conversation I had with my friend
a little while ago?”

“I am sorry, Princess. I heard your scream and came running to see you. Before I
could see you, your friend Chandramathi had come. I had no option other than
listening to your conversation.”

“You know that I sent her to bring you to me at any cost.”

“I heard that, Princess. That’s why I came to talk to you.”

“Otherwise you would not have come a mile near me, right? Oh My God! What
a concern! Your heart may be hard as a stone. But I can’t afford to be like that. I
can’t bear to see you in danger.”

“Princess, I know I am surrounded by danger. I am used to it now. Tell me is
there a new danger round the corner?”

“Get out of this Palace as fast as you can.”

“You want me to run away like a coward?”

“One should not run away from a battle-field. There is nothing wrong in running
away from conspirators.”

“Who are the conspirators?”

“Who else but Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran.”

“I am not afraid of them. I can’t run away from this palace because of them.”

“I can’t bear to see my brother hurting you.”

“Princess, how can you be responsible for your brother’s acts?”

“Parthibendran and Kandhanmaran want to kill you because of me.”

“If I am hurt on your account then I will consider it as a great privilege conferred
on me. And I would deem it at as a partial expression of my gratitude to you for

saving my life.”

“Nandini is after all right.”

“Oh, what did she tell you?”

“She told me that if I asked you to save your life you won’t listen. She made it
clear that we will have to have a different strategy to save your life. Please come
with me. Nandini wants to see you on a very urgent matter.”

“You know what that ‘urgent matter’ is”

“I do. When Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar tried to cross River Coleroon his boat
capsized. That’s the news we got just now.”

“I too heard it.”

“You will have to go immediately and find out the full truth. The Pazhuvur
Queen Nandini wants to request you in person.”

Vandhiya Thevan thought for some time.

“Pazhuvur Queen would have also warned you not to tell me this before she saw

me.”

“She did.”

“Then why did you tell me, Princess?”

“Because I am confused. Till a few days ago I was quite naive and childlike. I
never doubted anybody. Even if my friends were to talk ill of somebody I won’t
believe their words. Now I have started doubting everybody and everything.”

“Perhaps that was after you met me, Princess.”

“In a way it is true. Pazhuvur Queen wanted me to bring you to her presence.
When I was with her I did not doubt her. But now when I am talking to you I
doubt her intentions as well.”

“What kind of doubt, Princess?”

“She is also trying to hurt you.”

“What is the basis, Devi? Why should she hurt me?”

“I don’t know. I can’t tell. But when I think of her words and actions now I am

suspicious. She has a long sword and speaks to herself.”

“I am not afraid of a sword in a woman’s hand. I am rather afraid of.. . of.. “

“The sword-like eyes of a beautiful woman. This is a story which every man has
to say. I don’t want you to fear the sword in her hand. Remember the time you
came into my room from the Hunter’s hall.”

“How can I forget it, Princess?”

“Didn’t you say that you were chased by killers? At first I didn’t believe you. I
then went into to the Hunters Hall. I was sure there some men hiding there. I
didn’t know whether they came to kill you or came along with you. I was not
sure at that time. I could not complain about them. Then I will have to speak
about you as well.”

“I now realise how valuable was your help on that crucial day.”

“I am not saying that to fish for compliments. A short while ago Nandini sent me
to bring you. Soon after I came out of her room I went in again to clarify some
doubts. The door was bolted from within. I could hear voices from the Hunters’
Hall. I will tell you what’s there in my mind. Some men are hiding in the
Hunters’ Hall. And there is some connection between those men and Nandini
Devi.”

Vandhiya Thevan realised the gravity of the situation. His intuition had been

warning him of an imminent catastrophe. Manimekalai’s words confirmed his
intuition.

“Princess, you will have to help me now.”

“Tell me what you want.”

“There is a secret passage to the Hunters Hall from outside the Palace. One can
reach the Hunter’s Hall from Nandini’s chambers as well. Apart from these two
is there a third way to reach the Hunters’ Hall?”

“Yes, there is. There is a way for the workmen to reach the hall. My father used
to take his guests who visit us for the first time only through that way.”

“Princess, please take me to the Hunters’ Hall through that way now.”

“Why?”

“I want to know who is hiding there and what for?”

“I came here to save you from danger. Now you want me to take you to the very
eye of danger.”

“I have a knife in my waist all the time. It is better to face a known danger than
an unknown one. It is better to meet the danger half way than waiting for it to
come to us.”

“I will take you there on one condition.”

“What is that, Devi?”

“I will come with you. I too have a sword with me.”

Manimekalai pulled out a knife from her waist and showed it to Vandhiya
Thevan.

“Agreed.”

“Come let’s go. Make it fast. We should leave this place before Chandramathi
comes looking for me.”

Manimekalai took Vandhiya Thevan out of the garden. Then she took him along
the edge of the palace treading through the dark spots caused by the shadow of
the walls. Then she entered the Palace and walked through the deserted corridor.
Finally she stopped before some steps leading to a door. The door was closed.
She made Vandhiya Thevan wait there. She went to fetch a lamp.

She then walked up the steps and opened the door. Vandhiya Thevan followed

her. She lifted her lamp to show the way. Vandhiya Thevan saw a narrow flight
of stairs. They got down the steps. After some time Manimekalai spoke in a
barely audible whisper.

“Stop. I can hear some footsteps. Can you?”

Chapter 35: THE MONKEY GRIP

Vandhiya Thevan listened intently for a few minutes. At first he heard the sound
of foot steps. Then it stopped. And then it was heard again. The sound appeared
to recede.

“Should we go further? Is it not safe to return?” – Manimekalai asked meekly.

“Princess, once I decide on something I never go back. It’s not in my habits,
Princess.”

“That shows your obstinacy. Like a monkey you never loosen your grip.”

“Some time ago your friend Chandramathi called me ‘monkey face.’ A person
who has the monkey’s face will have its grip too.”

Till then Vandhiya Thevan was following Manimekalai. At that point he wanted
to overtake her and go forward. He made an attempt to pass her. Manimekalai
tried to stop him. They clashed against each other.The lamp in Manimekalai’s
hand fell down. It rolled down a few steps and then it went off. The uneven
passage was enveloped in darkness.

“Why did you do that, Princess?”

“Why did you try to get past me?”

“When there is danger I don’t let a woman to go before me. It is not in my
habits, Princess.”

“I will be grateful if you can give me the full list of your habits. I can then act
accordingly.”

“Sure, Devi. Will do that when time permits.”

“What are you going to do now? Come. Let’s go back to the garden. You sit
there, relax and then list out all your habits.”

“If you are afraid of the dark you may go back, Princess.”

“Why should I fear when a valiant man like you is by my side?”

“Then come. Let’s go. What’s the point in standing in the way?”

Vandhiya Thevan tried to move forward. He was about to trip and fall down.
Manimekalai held him.

“This is not a regular passage. It is uneven. You will never know where it is plain

and where there will be steps. You can’t find it in the dark. I have come through
this passage several times. I know all the steps, twists and turns in this passage.
You may be the most valiant man in the entire kingdom. Even then it pays to
hold my hand and follow me. Otherwise you won’t reach your destination – the
Hunter’s Hall. You will be lying on the way with broken legs.”

“At your command, Your Majesty. Thanks.”

It was pitch dark inside. Manimekalai grabbed Vandhiya Thevan’s hand. She
found that it was cold. ‘This man is a fearless warrior. He does not fear even the
vile conspirators. Why should he be afraid of holding my hand?’

They walked in silence for sometime. Vandhiya Thevan was about to fall many
times. Every time Manimekalai tightened the grip on his hand and averted the
fall.

“The way to hell will be dark like this.” – Vandhiya Thevan spoke after a long
time.

“Oh! Looks like you have been to hell.”

“I have never been to the hell or the heaven. But I have heard these from the
elders.”

“They would have heard it from their elders.”

Vandhiya Thevan could not believe that a girl, who just a few months ago, was
too shy to come in the presence of strangers could be so witty. Manimekalai
continued the argument.

“Agreed, the way to hell is dark. Tell me about the way to heaven.”

“It will be bathed in light. It will be like a million suns shining at the same time.”

“In that case I’d rather prefer hell. I can’t stand the glare of even a single sun. A
million suns will make me blind.”

“The way to hell leads you only to hell at the end. What’s the big deal?”

“If I follow a warrior like you, who knows, the way to hell might take me to
heaven.”

“And if I hold the hand of a Princess like you hell itself will become heaven.”

Vandhiya Thevan bit his tongue. ‘I ought not to have spoken like that.
Manimekalai may consider that improper. Or I may be giving false hopes to her.’

“Your hand is cold; you don’t look like going to heaven. You look like a
condemned prisoner going for his execution. See, you are trembling.”

“Princess, your words may be true. Death may be waiting for me at the end of
this journey.”

“But you were the one who said that once you decided you will never go back.
You are obstinate. Nobody knows how many killers are waiting for us at the
Hunters’ Hall.”

“Let there be a hundred. Who cares? I am not bothered. But I am worried about
something else.”

“I don’t get you.”

“If Kandhanmaran sees us going in dark holding each other’s hand.. . I am
scared of that.”

“So long as I am alive you can’t be hurt by my brother. Half of my dreams have
come true. Who knows the other half may also come true soon.”

They heard the sound of a door being bolted. The sound shocked them.

"We are near the Hunters’ Hall.” Manimekalai spoke in a soft voice.

They saw light at a distance. The light gradually grew larger and larger. And it
was coming closer and closer. Manimekalai left Vandhiya Thevan’s hand and
moved a little away from him.

The next second Idumban Kari appeared before them. He had a lamp in one
hand and a sharp knife with a lot of artwork in its handle in the other.

He was shocked to see them. But both Manimekalai and Vandhiya Thevan knew
that he was putting up a show.

“Sir, Devi, what is this? Why did you leave alone in the dark? If only you had
ordered this slave I would have held the light and showed you the way. Where
are you going?”

“Idumban Kari! We got news that Malaiyaman is coming with a huge army. I
wanted to double-check whether the walls, the passages and entrances are
secured. I sought the help of the Prince of Vallam for the purpose.”

“Quite surprising, Devi. I too was on a similar mission.”

“I thought so. The lamp we brought with us fell down on the way. It was put off.
We saw some light here. We thought it could be you and hence we came up.”

“The Prince wanted me to check the passages and walls. I did a thorough check
and am returning now. Can we return, Devi?”

“You give the lamp to me. You may go. The Prince of Vallam wants to pick up a
spear for his use from the Hunters’ Hall. He lost his spear in River Coleroon. A
war may erupt any time. The Prince wants to play safe.”

“You are right, Devi. A war may erupt any time. But it is better not to take
strangers into the Hunters’ Hall. You know better, Devi. I need not advise you.”

“That’s true, Idumban Kari. But this man is not a stranger. He is our Prince’s best
friend. Another relationship is on the cards. You give the lamp to me. You may
go now.”

Idumban Kari reluctantly gave the lamp to her. He was gone.

Vandhiya Thevan and Manimekalai walked further ahead and reached the
Hunters’ Hall. They heard the hooting sound of an owl.

“How can an owl enter the Palace?” – Manimekalai was surprised. But Vandhiya
Thevan was not.

“Perhaps a dead owl in the Hunters’ Hall has come back to life. Do you
remember Princess that once upon a time a dead monkey became alive on seeing
you?”

The door to the Hunters’ Hall was locked from outside. Manimekalai inserted the
key she had brought with her. After opening the lock she gently opened one of
the doors. The two slid in.

At first they saw nothing but the stuffed carcasses of dead elephants, bears,
tigers, deer, crocodiles, eagles and owls.

When Manimekalai lifted the lamp they both saw a bunch of human figures
sitting in the midst of the animal figures. The human figures were only halfcovered by the stuffed animals. The door through which they came in was
banged shut.

Vandhiya Thevan wanted to know who closed the door with so much force. At
the same time he was pushed from his back. He hit the tail-less monkey behind
which he had hidden when he had come there earlier.

Two powerful hands held him. It was only then Vandhiya Thevan knew by direct
personal experience how strong was a ‘monkey’s grip.’ He tried to retrieve the
knife from his waist; but miserably failed in that mission. He could not turn one
side or the other.

The hands of the monkey or perhaps the hands of a human being which came out
along with the hands of the monkey held him tight.

Another pair of hands wrested the knife from his waist.

“Aiyoo” Manimekalai came running towards Vandhiya Thevan screaming.
Vandhiya Thevan’s knife was pointed out to her chest.

“Don’t make noise. If you remain silent and do what we ask you to do your lives
will not be in danger. But if you try to shout both of you will be killed. The first
to fall will be this loud-mouthed braggart.”

A voice spoke in the dark.

Vandhiya Thevan knew that the voice belonged to Sorcerer Ravidasan.

“Be quiet, Princess. Let us know why they have come here and what do they
want us to do for them.”

Vandhiya Thevan’s voice was unperturbed.

Chapter 36: Pandimadevi

Vandhiya Thevan was bound to the stuffed tail-less monkey. Manimekalai was
bound to the horns of an antelope.

“Sorcerer, I am your enemy, agreed. But why do you bind the Kadambur
Princess? Do with me whatever you want to. But please leave her alone.”

“Patience, Thambi, patience. You interfered with our work several times. We left
you alive every time. Even then you have not stopped following us.”

Vandhiya Thevan laughed.

“Why are you laughing, my boy? Does hugging the tail-less monkey give you so
much happiness?” Ravidasan was quite sarcastic.

“No. Your words tickle me. I can’t help laughing.”

“What made you laugh, my boy?”

“Didn’t you say that I have been following you wherever you go? Well, I can say
the same thing about you as well. I can say with equal force that you are
interfering with my work. Even now when I am going for a critical mission

along with the Kadambur Princess you blocked me and had me bound to this
monkey.”

“Oh you think like that? Have your way. But this is the last time we are
interfering with your work. If you go back alive you will never see us again.”

“Then I should really struggle hard to be alive, Sorcerer. And hey why don’t you
teach me some sorcery so that I can be alive?”

“Oh sure, my boy. Whatever happens either in this hall or the next, be a silent
spectator. Don’t get excited. And your life won’t be in danger.”

“I am sure you love me a lot. Otherwise you won’t let go alive every time you
capture me.”

“Now that’s a good question. And I do concede that it is sheer foolishness. And
yet we don’t have heart to go against the wishes of our Devi.”

“Who is your Devi?”

“Don’t tell me that you don’t know till now. Our Devi is Pandimadevi. The
Pandyan Empress. She is the valiant wife of our King, the most valiant,
Veerapandiyan.”

“An ideal wife, I should say.”

“Scoundrel! One more word about our Pandimadevi I will kill you. Don’t tell me
I have not warned.”

“You are the one who is maligning her. You call somebody’s wife as
Veerapandiyan’s wife.”

“So what? Didn’t Rama’s wife stay in Ravana’s place for a few months?”

“She did. But in the end Rama won the war, released her from imprisonment and
took her home.”

“We too have come to take our Pandimadevi home. The mission for which she
was imprisoned in Pazhuvur Palace will be accomplished today.”

“Great! What mission?”

“Be patient, my boy. You will know soon. But if you try to act smart, both you
and this girl will be killed.”

Ravidasan ended the conversation and tried to go near the wall.

“Sorcerer, I want one more piece of information.”

Ravidasan turned around to see Vandhiya Thevan.

“Don’t call me Sorcerer henceforth.”

“How should I call you?”

“Call me ‘Chief Minister’. You will have to address me with due reverence.”

“Your Highness, can you please tell me the name of the great Kingdom of which
you are the Chief Minister.”

“You don’t know? I am the Chief Minister of the great Pandya Kingdom. Didn’t
you see the coronation ceremony that happened at the War Memorial of
Thiruppurambayam?”

“I did. But I thought it was a mere hallucination.”

“Perhaps that is the reason you did not reveal it to anybody else.”

“I tried to tell a few persons. They told me that I have lost my mind. They told
me that it was just a bad dream and advised me to forget it.”

“Let them think so. We let you go alive on that day because we knew that even if
you were to tell people about the ceremony nobody would believe you.”

“Sorcerer, is that the only reason you let me go alive?”

“What else?”

“Didn’t your Queen intervene on my behalf?”

“So what?”

“She will spare my life now as well.”

“She may. Till then be patient.”

“Sorcerer, your Queen sent Kadambur Princess to fetch me immediately. That is
why we came together.”

“There are other ways to enter the Queen’s chambers. Why did you choose this
way?”

“I don’t have to tell you the reason. I will explain it to your Queen.”

“Then wait till our Queen comes to you.”

“Sorcerer, ask them to release me and Kadambur Princess right now. Or else. “

“Or else...”

“I will shout so much that the whole Hall will tremble.”

“If you did three spears will pierce your body simultaneously. Your call.”

Vandhiya Thevan looked around. There were three conspirators armed with
spears ready to attack him any time.

“Thambi, you are really bright. We once had a plan of recruiting you for our
mission. But you have been caught in the love-net of that Pazhaiyaarai Devil, I
mean Kunthavai. That’s all right. Act intelligently at least now. If you shout you
are sure to be killed.”

Ravidasan walked towards the face of the elephant fixed in the wall. He placed
his ear on the wall and heard the sound from the other side. Then he grabbed the
tusks of the elephant and turned it around as if it were a lever. A small hole
appeared on the wall. The bright light of the room on the other side entered the
dark hall through the small hole. The hole now looked like a small moon for the
hall. The Hunters’ Hall was partially illuminated.

Vandhiya Thevan turned around. Manimekalai had taken the knife from her
waist and had cut the ropes that bound her.

The small light she had got from Idumban Kari was at the corner of the room.
The light was feeble and it did not fall on Manimekalai. The conspirators were
focussed only on Vandhiya Thevan. They never saw what Manimekalai did.
Vandhiya Thevan found out that Manimekalai was free now. He brought his lips
together and hooted like an owl.

The conspirators were stunned. Ravidasan was peering through the hole in the
wall. He was shocked and turned around.

“Oh is that you?” – Ravidasan rushed towards Vandhiya Thevan. The moment
he lifted his hands off the elephant’s tusks the hole in the wall disappeared. The
Hall was enveloped in darkness once again. The three conspirators armed with
spears ran towards Vandhiya Thevan. One of them was attacked by the stuffed
deer with long horns. A gigantic stuffed bear fell on the second and made him
fall on the floor. A huge stuffed crocodile fell on the third. A huge stuffed bat fell
on Ravidasan.

The conspirators were stunned by the sudden attack. They remained frozen for a
few minutes. Manimekalai used that time to go to Vandhiya Thevan and cut
away the rope that bound him. Vandhiya Thevan had been bound to a large tailless monkey. After being freed he threw that stuffed animal on the conspirators.
It took some time for the four conspirators to steady themselves. They pushed
away the stuffed animals thrown on them and finally managed to stand.
Meanwhile Vandhiya Thevan had armed himself with a spear.

At that time the door to Nandini’s chambers opened. Hunters’ Hall was now
bathed in light.

Nandini entered the Hunters’ Hall.

“Sorcerer, what foolishness is this? Why are you making so much noise here?”

She walked in.

Chapter 37: An Iron Heart Melted

Nandini was taken aback to see Vandhiya Thevan and Manimekalai in the
Hunters’ Hall.

“Oh My God! How did you guys come here?”

“Devi, your friend told me that you wanted to see me. I wanted to obey your
command. But now I realise that I ought not to have taken the advice of a
woman.” – Vandhiya Thevan.

“Akka, I never advised him. I just requested him to come with me to meet you.”
– Nandini

Nandini regained her composure and smiled.

“My dear friend, even when we request men to do something, it will be
considered as advising them.”

“Not just advising Devi. It’s a command, Devi. Princess Manimekalai told me
that you wanted to see me. I hesitated. She grabbed my hand and dragged me
here. Net result: I was trapped with these murderers.” – Vandhiya Thevan.

“Sir, from what I see here I don’t think that these people are murderers. If I had
not come here now you would have murdered them all.” – Nandini

“Akka, these people are murderers. There is no doubt about it. A short while ago
they tied him to a tail-less monkey.”

Nandini smiled.

“Manimekalai, you told me once this man was hiding behind the same tail-less
monkey. Somehow these people should have known that.”

“Not ‘somehow’ Akka. Didn’t I tell you that I saw somebody in the Hunters’
Hall before you came in? These are the guys. They were behind the Prince of
Vallam on that day. He managed to escape from them.”

“Then why did you take him to these people again, Manimekalai? Why did you
bring him through this way?”

“Akka, a little while ago my brother Kandhanmaran was saying that he was
about to meet you. I didn’t want to be seen by him with this man. That was why
I chose this way. In a way it is good. Otherwise these murderers....”

“My dear sister, they are not murderers. They have not come to kill the Prince of
Vallam. This man was caught by these people two or three times earlier. They
did not harm him. They set him free every time he was caught by them. If you
don’t believe my words you can ask the Prince of Vallam.”

“Then who are these people, Akka? Are they telling the truth? Do you know
them? Have they come to take you, Akka?”

“Yes, my dear friend. They have come to rescue me. They have come to take me
home. I will tell you my story – the whole of it. You two come with me. Let
them be here.”

Nandini then spoke to Ravidasan.

“Sorcerer, any harm done to these two people, I will consider it done directly to
me. If you happen to meet these people anywhere in future you should treat them
with utmost reverence.”

Ravidasan came forward to speak.

“Devi, this man knows our secret signal. He was the one who hooted like an
owl.”

“That is more than enough to show that he belongs to us. Sorcerer, what
happened to your brain? Whatever has happened has happened. Listen, till I
give orders no sound should come from inside the hall. Am I clear?”

“Very.”

Nandini, Manimekalai and Vandhiya Thevan entered Nandini’s chambers
through the gate inside the elephant’s face. The door was closed immediately.

“My dear sister, you are brilliant. In a way it is better that you brought him
through the Hunters’ Hall. Your brother left this room just now. He has promised
to bring Adithya Karikalan here in a few minutes. I should send you off before
they come. And I also want to take leave of you two.”

“What is this, Akka? Didn’t you say that you wanted to send this man to know
about your husband? But now you say you want to take leave of us.”

“After talking to your brother I changed my mind, Sis. Whether my husband is
alive or not, I can’t stay here any longer. This warrior also cannot stay here any
longer. It will be really dangerous if he did. Warrior of the Vaana Clan, please
leave this place right now. You may not be keen to live; but at least for the sake
of this girl you will have to leave this place.”

“Akka, let him take me with him if he is going. After you and this man are gone
I can’t be confined to this palace-prison.”

Vandhiya Thevan intervened.

“Princess, you have not understood the mind of the Pazhuvur Queen. She says
that if I leave this place you can marry Adithya Karikalan and be crowned as the
Empress of Chozha Kingdom.”

“No, I did not mean that. The tragedy of marrying Adithya Karikalan should not
happen to any girl in this world. Least of all to this sweet girl, Manimekalai, who
is dearer to me than my own life. Warrior, why are you so keen on twisting my
words? If you escape from this place now at a later time you may have the good
fortune of marrying this sweet girl. Manimekalai, if you truly love this young
man ask him to get away from here right now.”

“Queen of Pazhuvur, I am ready to go. I need something from you. I am
begging you. If you yield to my request I will go at once.”

“Tell me, Warrior, what can I give you? I have nothing.”

“You have a sword which has the symbol of a fish. You give that to me, Devi. I
will go away. I lost my sword in the floods at Coleroon. You know that, Devi.”

“Warrior, there are hundreds of swords and spears in the Hunters’ Hall. Why
don’t you take whatever you want from there? Why do you insist on getting my
sword? It is the only weapon I have to protect my life.”

“Devi, are you bearing this sword and worshipping it only to save your life?”

“To save my honour too which is more precious than my life.”

“You don’t have any other motive?”

“What other motives can I have?”

“It could be to avenge the death of Veerapandiyan.”

“I thought you won’t broach that subject in the presence of Manimekalai. Now
that you have spoken I don’t want to hide anything. Manimekalai, you should
also know. You should know why I came to Kadambur Palace.”

Nandini took charge of the sword with the symbol of fish engraved on its handle.

“I did not come here to resolve the internal strife in Chozha Kingdom. I did not
come here to divide the Kingdom between Adithya Karikalan and
Madhuranthakan. I did not come here to enjoy the pleasures of this Kadambur
Palace. Sister, I did not even come here to get you married. I came here to
avenge the death of Veerapandiyan. I came here to kill the wicked man who
killed Veerapandiyan. This is the sword of the Pandya clan. I have taken a vow
on this precious sword that I will kill the man who slew my beloved,
Veerapandiyan. Either I will fulfil my vow or die.”

Nandini spoke as if she were possessed.

Vandhiya Thevan’s voice was drained of all emotions.

“You want to drive me away because you think I will be a hindrance to your
mission. That is why you have been bluffing that my life is in danger.”

“Oh are you going to stand in my way? Fat chance. Who prevented you? Why
don’t you reveal all these to your friend and stop him from coming here?”

“Devi, I can’t do that. That’s why I have come to you. I am ready to even fall at
your feet to prevent you from committing this heinous sin.”

“Sin? Heinous sin? Do you know the meaning of those words? Ok, let me ask
my dear friend Manimekalai. Listen to me, Manimekalai. Let’s say you have
given your heart to a man. That man is sick and lying in bed, poor and helpless.
His enemy comes to kill him. You fall at the feet of his enemy. You beg him to
spare the life of your beloved. The enemy turns a deaf ear to all your passionate
pleas. He kills your beloved. Will your act of seeking revenge be called as a sin?
And that too a heinous sin?”

“Never, Akka. But I would not have fallen at the feet of the enemy and begged
for my beloved’s life. I would have killed the enemy with my knife.”

Vandhiya Thevan intervened:

“Princess, what if that enemy happens to be your own brother?”

“That does not change anything. I would have killed him anyway.”

“There you are, my darling.” Nandini beamed at Manimekalai.

“I think the Princess is a little bit carried away. Even though she hates what her
brother Kandhanmaran is doing I don’t think she will ever have the heart to kill
him.”

Nandini and Manimekalai exchanged meaningful glances.

Nandini continued.

“Why this silly question? I will never kill my brother. When you met me first
you told my brother Thirumalai’s name. That is why I started to like you.
Because you are Azhwarkkadian’s friend I helped you escape from danger many
times. If I happen to die without taking revenge then you should ask
Azhwarkkadian to forgive me. I did not listen to his advice; but I have not
forgotten him. You should tell this to him.”

“Devi, why do you want to continue with your evil drama? Azhwarkkadian is
not your brother.”

“Then who is my brother?”

“Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan. I don’t want your name to be tainted with a
ruthless fratricide. I beg you to please give me the sword belonging to the clan of
Veerapandiyan.”

“Did you share this rare figment of your imagination – that Karikalan and I are
siblings – with him? Did he believe you?” Nandini was sarcastic.

“Looks like he believes me. But I don’t know what is in his mind.”

“But I do. He is fascinated by the powers of imagination of that Pazhaiyaarai
Demoness”

“Devi, I tell the truth. It’s not imagination. It’s not the imagination of the
Pazhaiyaarai Princess. I saw it with my own eyes in Lanka.”

“What did you see?”

“I saw a goddess who could not speak. That Goddess saved Prince
Arulmozhivarman, Azhwarkkadian and me from great dangers. One day at
midnight when we were walking by the side of an old building in the streets of
Anuradhapura this angel was on the other side of the street and signalled us to
come. No sooner we moved away than the front portion of the building under
which we were walking fell on the ground. Prince Arulmozhivarman worships
that woman as the presiding deity of the Chozha clan.”

“What is the connection I have to this story? You should have told this story to
Princess Kunthavai who wants to crown her darling brother Arulmozhivarman.
She would have been pleased. Why do you tell this story to me?”

"There is a strong reason, Devi. When I saw that angel in the dim moon light on
the streets of Anuradhapura I was surprised. ‘When did the Junior Queen of
Pazhuvur come to Srilanka?’ I asked myself again and again. There is absolutely
no difference between you and that woman, Devi. If your jewels are removed

and your hair is let loose you will be exactly like her, Devi.”

“Why should I believe you? I know the powers of your fertile imagination. Even
this idea could have germinated from there.”

“I promise, Devi. I swear on... .. “

“You may swear on any one. I don’t care. I won’t believe you.”

“Your Highness. You say that you can’t believe me. That is a damned lie, Your
Majesty. You know what I say is true. You have used this to your advantage.
When I first met you in your Thanjavur Palace this Sorcerer came there hooting
like an owl. You sent me away. I hid myself in the underground treasure which at
that time was inadvertently left open. I happened to see some strange sights
there.”

“Strange sights? What were they?”

“I saw Kandhanmaran going away with Prince Madhuranthakan through the
underground passage.”

“So what?”

“A little later I saw you and the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar going through the same
passage. At that time I did not know where you were going. And then I found

out. You went there as your mother’s ghost to torment the Emperor.”

Nandini had been putting up a show of strength till then. She broke down and
collapsed on a chair in the room.

“What else did you find out?”

“When you and your husband were going through the passage Kandhanmaran
was returning after dropping Madhuranthakan at his Palace. He told something
to Pazhuvettaraiyar. He gave a signal to the person who was bearing a torch.”

“What was that signal for?”

“You know better, Devi. Pazhuvettaraiyar ordered the man to kill Kandhanmaran
by stabbing him on his back. I prevented that and saved Kandhanmaran’s life.
What did I get in return? Nothing but blame. Kandhanmaran thinks that it was I
who stabbed him.”

Nandini spoke while she was looking at Manimekalai.

“Warrior, you are saying something to confuse the mind of this sweet lady.”

“Devi I have not spoken about this to anybody so far. And I won’t open my
mouth in future – if and only if you give the sword in your hand to me.”

“I can’t give the sword. Why should I? You can tell anybody you want. You can
also add a few more bits of your imagination to make the story more interesting.
Try to stop Karikalan from coming here. Why do you disturb me? Go away.”

Suddenly Nandini’s eyes were filled with tears.

“Devi, I know the mind of Crown Prince. I can’t stop him from coming here. If I
try to stop him he will insist on coming here. That is why I am begging you.”

“What right do you have to request favours from me? Let’s assume whatever
you said is true. I will give it to you, you saw my own mother at Srilanka. Tell
me why should I give up my right to revenge? The Emperor has betrayed my
mother. Why should I show compassion to him or his children? If whatever you
said is true I have stronger reasons for revenge.”

“No, Devi. Do you think your mother will approve your thirst for revenge? That
angel considers the Emperor’s children dearer than her own life. Do you think
she will bear to see her own daughter killing one of the Emperor’s children?
No, she won’t. And if she came to know of your act she will hate you. She will
torment you so long as you shall live. Of course she cannot speak. But her
pointed stare will give you hell so long as you are alive.”

An endless stream of tears gushed from Nandini’s eyes. She wiped her tears and
stared blankly at a distance. It appeared as if she saw something very tragic. That
was what the expression on her face told the others in the room.

“Amma! Amma! My dear mother! I am already tortured by the severed head and
the body of the slain king Veerapandiyan. Why should you add to my agony?”

Nandini closed her eyes as if she did not want to see what was unfolding before
her eyes. For a while the room was silent but for the soft sobs of Nandini.

Manimekalai spoke after a long time.

“Warrior, I never knew that you will be so cruel.”

Nandini removed her hands from her eyes.

“He is blameless, sister. Whatever he says is for my well-being. He wants to
save me from a great sin. Even then.. . you know .. I am deeply disturbed.”

She then looked at Vandhiya Thevan through a screen of tears.

“Warrior, you have done something which nobody else could have done. I
concede. I am giving this precious sword to you. Get it.”

When Vandhiya Thevan was about to receive the sword Nandini suddenly
withdrew.

“Wait! Tell me if you can do me a favour before you accept this sword from me.
If I leave this place without fulfilling my vow those in the Hunters’ Hall won’t
let me go alive. They will place me on a pyre and burn me. I am not afraid of
that, Warrior. But I want to see my mother at least once before I die. Warrior of
the Vaana clan, I said that I don’t believe your words. It’s a lie. I believe
whatever you said about my mother who is wandering in the Lankan forests with
her hair let loose. I believe every word you spoke to me. I have seen her too.”

“When? How?”

Nandini spoke amidst sobs.

“When I was a child many times I used to wake up from my sleep suddenly. At
that time I have seen the figure of a woman looking at me. The woman’s stare
would be very pointed. She won’t even bat her eye-lids. When I am fully awake
that figure would go away. This filled my mind with fear as well as surprise. I
loved to see my figure in the mirror. I used to spend all day seeing my figure in
the mirror. So my face was registered in my mind.

“I have been surprised to find that the face of that woman who used to stare at
me strongly resembled mine. I have heard stories of spirit leaving one body and
entering another. I used to wonder whether my spirit has left my body and has
entered hers. At times I used to think that I am dead and whatever is lying on the
floor is just my lifeless body. Was it a dream? Or a hallucination? Or had I lost
my mind? I used to be worried.

“When I grew up I realised that whatever I saw was real. When I found that the
Emperor was bewildered on seeing me I was sure that she was my mother.
Thanks to hints inadvertently dropped by Azhwarkkadian and certain other
factors I was sure that I had a mother who strongly resembled me. I then had the

natural craving to see her at least once, to lie on her lap and cry to my heart’s
content. And today when I hear your words that craving has become very
intense. If you promise to take me to my mother I will at this moment abandon
this mission of seeing revenge. And as a sign of change of my mind I will give
this sword to you.”

Vandhiya Thevan was lost in thoughts. He never expected this development.
What was he going to do?

Manimekalai joined in Nandini’s plea.

“Warrior, I too request on her behalf. Please give word that you will fulfil her
desire. Of seeing her mother.”

Vandhiya Thevan spoke with hesitation. “I will do my best.”

“Then we should leave at once. We should leave the place before Adithya
Karikalan comes here. How can we go from here? The usual entrance is
dangerous. We may meet Kandhanmaran and Karikalan on the way.”

“I will take you out through the underground passage in the Hunters’ Hall.”

“Akka! Let me also come with you. Take me with you. Will you?”

Nandini ignored her.

“But I don’t want to go through the Hunters’ Hall. Ravidasan and his men will
not let us go alive.”

“Devi, you give the sword in your hand to me. I will manage the four men hiding
there.”

“No. That would complicate things. Manimekalai, is there any other way to get
out from here”

Manimekalai arched her eye-brows and thought for a while.

“Akka, I don’t think there is any other way. But you can ask this Warrior. On an
earlier occasion he managed to vanish from this place. Ask him how he did it.”

Nandini looked askance at Vandhiya Thevan.

“Yes, Devi. There is another way. I accidentally found it. But it is not easy to go
through that way. One has to jump from terrace to another. I am thinking
whether you can do it. A better option will be to face the Sorcerer and his men,
defeat them and then use the underground passage through the Hunters’ Hall.”

Manimekalai spoke in a shocked voice.

“Warrior, I can hear footsteps. They are coming.”

They trained their ears and listened. Yes there were sounds of footsteps in the
ante-room.

“Warrior, go to the Hunters’ Hall. Fast.”

“There is no better place to hide. Devi, give me that sword.”

Nandini tried to give the sword to Vandhiya Thevan. It slipped from her hand
and fell down. The clangouring sound of metal hitting the stone floor
reverberated throughout the room.

Chapter 38: Was It All A Drama

When the sword fell down, although accidentally, the clangouring sound of
metal merged seamlessly with the sound of Nandini’s tragic laugh.

“Warrior, I wanted to change my mind. But looks like God thinks otherwise. Let
the sword remain here. You go hide yourself.”

Vandhiya Thevan ignored her words and bent down to lift the sword by its sharp
edge. Nandini placed her foot firmly on the sword’s handle and spoke to him
with greater firmness:

“No, don’t do that. The Crown Prince would have heard the sound of a sword
falling. And if he does not see a sword here he will become suspicious. He
already doubts your intentions. So go away. Vanish from this place as you did in
the past.”

Vandhiya Thevan was hurt by the pointed end of the sword. He abandoned the
sword and stood up. Nandini saw a speck of blood on his palm.

“I will honour the promise I gave you. I will never kill my brother. Run away.
Run for your life. If only he sees you here..... “

“Please go. At once. I beseech you. Please go.” Manimekalai’s request was more
passionate. Footsteps were heard very close.

Vandhiya Thevan reluctantly slipped into the place where the music instruments
were stored. He opened the door to let himself in. The sound of footsteps was
heard very close, near the entrance of the room.

Manimekalai was surprised. She never thought Vandhiya Thevan would hide
there.

“Sister, I suggest you hide behind the screen. Slip away when we are talking.”

No sooner than Manimekalai got behind the screen Adithya Karikalan and
Kandhanmaran entered the room.

Adithya Karikalan came near Nandini and looked around. He sensed an unusual
movement behind the screen. He pretended not to have noticed it.

As soon as he came near Nandini he saw the sword lying on the floor. He threw
a questioning glance at Nandini. She could not withstand the stare. Karikalan’s
eyes seemed to have penetrated her heart. Unable to bear his eyes she bent down
to lift the sword. Karikalan predicted her movements and grabbed the sword
before she could. He peered over the beautiful weapon from the handle to the tip.
He did not fail to notice a drop of blood stuck in the sharp end of the sword.

Karikalan said:

“Devi, we heard some sound as we were coming here. It must be the sound of

this sword falling down. Looks like you were ready to welcome us armed with a
sword.”

“Don’t you know that is the best way to welcome young tigers, and youthful
lions, known for their valour?”

“The wicked lions and tigers need claws and teeth. But the beautiful deer do not
need them. That was why God did not give those weapons to them.”

“At times even a deer may be forced to use its horns. There may be an occasion
when an antelope might thank God for giving it horns. Please give the sword to
me.” - Nandini pleaded.

“No, no. This does not suit you. You have been given slender hands to pluck
flowers and weave them into garlands. How can you wield a sword with those
hands?”

“Crown Prince, there was a time when this poor woman’s hands eagerly plucked
flowers and lovingly made then into garlands. There was a time when this poor
soul waited for the man for whom the garland was made but was disappointed. It
looks as if it happened in a past birth, many, many aeons ago. Now the hands of
this orphan have to seek the company of a killer weapon. And I beg of you, my
Lord, don’t deprive me of that company too.”

“What is this Devi? Why are you calling yourself an orphan? There are many
young warriors whose heads are at your feet and to whom your slightest whim is
a divine command. Don’t you know that, Devi?”

“Even if my leg accidentally brushes against the heads of those crooks I will cut
off my leg. I need a sword like this at least for that, Prince.”

“What words, Devi? I can’t bring myself to hear such harsh words from your
sweet mouth. Your legs are fit to be adorned with the best of anklets. You are
born to walk on the corridors of great palaces accompanied by the majestic
sound of anklets. And by your gracefulness put the majestic swan to shame. If
only the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar hears these words he would writhe in pain,
Devi.”

“Who bothers about him, Prince? If that old lion roars once these young tiger
cubs would run for their lives. And those cubs are now out in the open. And
when the cubs heard that he might have been drowned in River Coleroon they
have become bolder still. Using this chance the cubs might try to get too close to
me. I am planning to use this sword to keep those cubs at bay. I seek the help of
this weapon to save the name and honour of a man who found me in garbage and
made me his wife bestowing the status of a queen on this poor friendless girl.
And to express my gratitude to the man who gave me the royal privileges I am
training my hands, fit for plucking flowers, to wield this sword.”

“Devi, are you keeping the sword only for that purpose? Are you keeping this
sword in a box, praying to it every day, placing it close to your soft cheeks, only
to safeguard the honour of Pazhuvettaraiyar? Or just to keep away those idiots
who foolishly lust for you? Is it only for that, Devi?”

“What other motives can I have, Your Highness?”

“Why, there could be several other motives. For instance you may want to take

revenge. You may want to kill the person who brutally refused your passionate
pleas and inflicted a wound on your heart that would never heal.”

Nandini hung down her head and sighed. Then she looked up at the Crown
Prince and spoke in a very clear voice.

“I don’t deny that once I had that thought. And yes I have been worshipping the
sword precisely for that purpose. I was biding my time. The time has come; but
my hands have become powerless. My heart is no longer firm. Henceforth I will
use this sword only to save my honour and that of my husband. So please give it
back to me.”

“Devi, why don’t I do that for you? Why can’t I take upon myself the
responsibility of punishing the person who tries to hurt you or your husband?”

“You can’t do it, Prince. How can you punish your dear friends for the sake of
this poor orphan?”

“Why not, Nandini? I surely can. I didn’t believe whatever you told about
Vandhiya Thevan in the lake front on that day. But later Kandhanmaran
confirmed what you said. You may forgive him, Devi. But I won’t. Won’t you
tell me where he is now? No need. You don’t have to tell. I am not yet blind. I
can still see what’s happening around me.”

Adithya Karikalan roared. He started walking towards the screen covering the
cot.

Nandini bent down to touch Karikalan’s feet. She knelt down, folded her hands
and spoke in a passionate voice.

“Please Prince. Please don’t do that. Please. I beseech you, don’t do that.”

“Nandini, reserve your compassion for something else. I don’t want to show
mercy to a traitor who has been acting as my friend all these years.”

Karikalan brushed Nandini aside and walked ahead.

Nandini looked around. She was in a state of shock. Her eyes had lost their
focus. Nandini spoke to Kandhanmaran who had frozen like a statue near the
entrance.

“Please, stop him. Please, I beg of you. Please stop the Crown Prince.”
Kandhanmaran was thawed. But he did not move. He let out a nasty smile and
froze again.

Karikalan wielded the Pandya sword in one hand while he used the other hand to
pull away the screen that covered the cot.

Inside the screen was Manimekalai armed with a small knife. She screeched.

Adithya Karikalan was stunned. His hand still wielded the sword which was now
held high. And then he used the sword to tear off the screen cloth.

“Oh My God! The Kadambur tigress is here. I know its claws are pretty sharp.”
Adithya Karikalan laughed at his own joke. Then he spoke to Kandhanmaran.

“Dear friend. Take your sister with you. Leave her with her mother and come
back. I don’t know how many tiger cubs are going to be born to her. If she had
become a prey to Veerapandiyan’s sword the Chozha Kingdom would have lost
many valiant sons and daughters.”

Manimekalai had roared like a tiger only a few seconds ago. But now after
hearing the words of Adithya Karikalan her face became red in shame. Before
Kandhanmaran could approach her she got ready to go out of the room.

Once the brother and sister left the place Adithya Karikalan spoke to Nandini.

“Devi, I enacted a drama to drive away those two people. At least now we can
speak the truth.”

Nandini was overawed by Karikalan’s performance. “My God! Were you acting,
Prince? Then I should say it was one of the best performances I have ever seen. I
thought it was real.”

“Nandini, you are the best actress in the whole world. If I had deceived you by
my little show then I can be really proud of my talents. But you did not prevent
me when I went towards the screen with an uplifted sword. Why? Perhaps you
wanted to add killing of a woman to the long list of my sins, right?”

“Oh My God! This girl is the only one in the whole world whom I truly love. Do
you think I will let her die before my eyes? I know you will know for yourself
when you pull away the screen. That’s why I kept quiet.”

Karikalan laughed.

“I can’t understand the significance of this laugh.”

“The reason you gave was more than enough to justify my killing that girl.”

“I don’t get you, Prince.”

“Whosoever you love they will automatically become my first enemy. You know
that.”

“I know. That’s because of my bad luck. But I never thought that your fury will
hurt a naive, innocent girl like Manimekalai.”

“Or else you may have other motives. If I had accidentally killed Manimekalai
Kandhanmaran would have killed me to avenge his sister. Or else Manimekalai
might have killed me with her knife before I could have killed her.”

“Oh My God! Prince, don’t let your imagination run riot.”

“Imagination? Your motives are scarier than my imagination. Tell me the truth.
Don’t try to fuel the fire that has been scorching my heart for many years. Why
did you ask me to come to this Kadambur Palace? Why did you make
Pazhuvettaraiyar to go to Thanjavur? Don’t tell me that you came here only to
divide the Chozha Empire. Or to get Manimekalai married to me. I am not in a
mood to believe those figments of your imagination. And if I believed them I
would not have come here.”

“Then why did you come here, Prince? What kind of hope did you have when
you came here?”

“Hope? No, I didn’t have any. My mind is full of pessimism and disbelief. I want
to leave this country. I want to leave this world. I wanted to take leave of you
before I go. Once you begged for a boon from me. You fell at my feet and cried.
You folded your hands and sobbed. I didn’t listen. I was furious. I was cruel. I
brutally refused what you asked for. I have been thinking of my inhuman
behaviour every living second. Tell me if there is any way I can atone for my
sins. Tell me, Nandini. If there’s something I can do I will surely do it before I
go.”

“What atonement can there be, Prince? Those who are dead are dead. Nothing
can bring them back to life. Nobody in this world has the power to bring them
back to life. Some stories and epics talk of dead people being resurrected. But
we have not witnessed even a single instance of resurrection.”

“We cannot revive the dead. Agreed. But the sin of killing can be atoned by
giving one’s life. Look here, Nandini. Don’t try to hide anything from me. I am
not as naive as you think. I know why you asked me to come here. I know why
you sent Pazhuvettaraiyar away on some pretext. Even when we were children I
had the power to divine what was there in your mind. You deliberately infuriated

me on that fateful day because you wanted me to step down from my level and
do a morally depraved act. That was why you wantonly pleaded for
Veerapandiyan’s life. You wanted to be my side and torment me. That was the
reason you married Pazhuvettaraiyar and came to Thanjavur. I was living
peacefully in Kancheepuram. You did not like that. That was why you dragged
me here to Kadambur. And you have come here only to kill me with
Veerapandiyan’s sword to avenge his death. If that is your wish this is the best
time to fulfil it. Come on. Kill me. I sent Kandhanmaran and his sister away so
that you can kill me and quench your thirst for revenge. Come on, Nandini. Have
this sword. Kill me now.”

Nandini got the sword from the Crown Prince. The hand that held the sword was
trembling. Nandini’s whole body was shivering. Her eyes were full. She broke
into a heart-rending sob.

“What is this cowardice? Why do you hesitate now? You might have grown up
in a priest’s family. But you were born of a warrior. A lion cub growing with
sheep will never lose its ferocity. I know your heart. You need not have to
employ Kandhanmaran, Parthibendran or Vandhiya Thevan to avenge the death
of your lover. You need not have to make me furious over them. You can fulfil
your mission. Right now. With your own hands. Come on fast. Do it before
anybody comes in. Kandhanmaran will come back after leaving his sister with
his mother. Parthibendran and Sambuvaraiyar might come any time. My
grandfather Malaiyaman might come with them. I don’t believe that
Pazhuvettaraiyar might have been washed away by the floods at Coleroon. He
might come any time. You won’t have another opportunity to seek revenge. Your
killing me is not a crime. Nor will it be considered a sin. On the other hand you
will be doing a great service for me.”

Nandini tried to muffle her sobs as she spoke: “Prince, I am not hiding anything
from you. Nor do I want to. Whatever you said about my motives is true. I made
you come here because I wanted to take revenge. I wanted to kill you. But now
when I have the right opportunity I don’t have any strength in my hands. I don’t

have the courage in my heart. Even as I heard the sound of your footsteps the
sword fell from my hand. See how my hand, that holds the sword, is shivering in
fear.”

“Yes, I am seeing that, Nandini. But I don’t know the reason. I know how strong
your heart is. Our legend says that Lord Brahma, the Creator, fashioned
Vajrayudha, the weapon of Devendra, the chief of gods, from the strongest metal
he had created. I think He should have used whatever metal was left after the job
to fashion your heart. Why did your heart melt now?”

“Because of a message brought by your friend Vandhiya Thevan.”

“Oh you mean his latest discovery that you and I are siblings, right? When we
were discussing that on the lake-front you told me that you did not believe that
news. You also told me that it might be a conspiracy to keep us apart.”

“I tried hard not to believe that news. But news which he brought to me has
destroyed my determination.”

“Aha! What is that? Another figment of his wonderful imagination? What else
did he tell?”

“He told about my mother. He told me that he saw her in Lanka. I don’t have any
grounds to deny it. Prince, once upon a time I begged for a boon from you. You
refused. And you said just now that you still grieve over your refusal. Let me ask
a boon from you once again. Will you at least grant my wish this time, Prince?”

“First tell me what you want. I will then tell you whether I can give it or not.”

“Prince, it is true that I have vowed to avenge the death of Veerapandiyan. I have
taken a vow that with this Pandya Sword with a fish emblem on it, I will either
kill you and if I fail to do so, I will kill myself. My heart does not have the
courage to kill you; nor my hands strong enough for the act. I want to kill myself
and die in your presence. But alas I don’t even have the strength to do it. What if
I make a half-baked attempt at killing myself! So please help me to fulfil my
vow. Take back this sword. You kill me with this sword. I would have fulfilled
my vow. And if that happens I will be grateful to you not only in this birth but in
all my births to follow.”

Nandini offered the sword to Adithya Karikalan. He got it from her.

Then the Crown Prince started to laugh. His laugh became louder with every
passing minute. The whole palace echoed the sound of his laugh.

Chapter 39: Victory Of The Dark Forces

Vandhiya Thevan, hiding in the place where the musical instruments were
stored, heard the frenzied laugh of Adithya Karikalan. The hairs on his body
stood straight. His intuition warned him that a calamity was imminent. The Lord
of Death was present in the room in the form of a shadow. The legendary rope
with which he pulled the souls to his place was in his hand. The Death Lord was
about to throw the rope to capture his prey. But who would be his prey? Whose
life was he going to take on that day? Was it Karikalan’s? Or Nandini’s? Or
perhaps the lives of both? Would the brother kill his sister? Or would the sister
kill her brother?

Princess Kunthavai had sent him there precisely to avert that disaster. He had
done his best. He had told about the relationship to both. He had succeeded in
melting the hard hearts of Karikalan and Nandini. But would that change the
course of destiny? Would that prevent a frenzied Karikalan or a passionate
Nandini from committing a grave crime? Would something good happen if I go
between them now? If I sacrifice my life would their fury abate? Vandhiya
Thevan’s mind was in a state of extreme turbulence. He decided to wait for some
more time. A hurried intervention at an inopportune time might mess up things.
He gritted his teeth and decided to wait.

As soon as Karikalan ended his frenzied laugh the conversation continued.

“I have not done anything in my life to please you. I am happy that at least at the
time of my death I did something to make you laugh.

“Yes, Nandini. Today is a happy day in my life. You have been tormenting me all

these years. All that is going to end today. When I left Kancheepuram this time I
was in a way determined. But I was afraid that when I see you in person I might
vacillate in my decision. Now there is no room for that. You have given the
sword to me. “ Karikalan laughed again.

“My Lord, today is a happy day for me as well. I can’t imagine of a death
sweeter than dying at your hands. There was a time when I dreamt of adorning
my neck with a garland from your hand. But that is destined to remain distant
dream forever. At least I have the good fortune of adorning my neck with a
sword from your hand. What are you waiting for, my Lord? Come on. Fast. Kill
me.”

“This has been delayed for several years. What’s the big deal in delaying that for
a few more minutes? Look at me, Nandini. Look at me for one last time and
answer my question honestly. I ought to have garlanded you; why should I kill
you? If it is true that you dreamt of marrying me in the past, why not make it a
reality now? Name those who will obstruct your dream. I will kill them instead
of killing you.”

“No, my Lord. Don’t do it. May you be forever blessed. Let not anybody die on
my account hereafter.”

“I will demolish all the obstacles on the way. Don’t blame Destiny. I can rewrite
what the Creator has already written on your head. I will erase the tragic story of
your life and write a happy story in its place.”

“Yes, you can correct what the Creator has written on my head. But can you
change the fact of my birth?”

“What are you talking about, Nandini? Do you refer to the admonition from my
family that I should not talk to you or be friends with you because you hailed
from a priest’s family? No. You grew up in a priest’s family. But you were not
born there. We both knew it even at that time.”

“I am not talking about that, My Lord. I am referring to the message brought in
by your dear friend, the warrior from the Vaana Clan. I am referring to the
urgent message sent by Pazhaiyaarai Princess. Have you forgotten that I am your
sister?”

“Nandini, when I told that to you on the other day you did not believe me. You
told me that it was another conspiracy to keep us apart. Then I thought over it
and came to a similar conclusion. If you want to be sure of that.. “

“No, no, my Lord. No. I don’t have any doubt on that. We are not in any way
related by blood.”

“Then tell me Nandini what’s your problem.”

“I have married Pazhuvettaraiyar who is in a way like a grand father to you. I am
now your grandmother. What more reason do you want?”

“Nandini, don’t try to deceive me with that yarn once again. You might be the
Junior Queen of Pazhuvettaraiyar for the outside world. But in reality you have
not married him. You are staying in his Palace for another specific reason. Once
when I asked you about this you gave the same answer. I reminded you of the
love we had and about the dream we shared. You imposed horrible conditions to
make the dream real. You wanted me to kill Pazhuvettaraiyar, imprison my

father and my sister and make you an Empress. I thought you were a heartless
demon and went back to Kancheepuram. Did you leave me alone after that? No.
You came in my dream. You interfered with my life. You tortured me in dreams
as well as in reality. At times you would cry, sob and torment me. At times you
suck my life with your seductive smile. You have driven me crazy.”

“My Lord, why do you blame me for your hallucination? You reaped what you
sowed. You suffered for the harm you caused me. What can I do? Do you think
that I did not suffer? Do you think that I am indulging in the pleasures of
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace.”

Nandini’s voice was furious now.

Vandhiya Thevan overhearing the conversation trembled in fear.

Karikalan’s voice also rose.

“Did you suffer? Then why should we waste our time in useless talk? Agree to
come with me. Let us leave this place immediately. I am ready to sacrifice the
great Chozha Kingdom for you. I am ready to give up the country of my birth,
my parents, my brother and my sister, everything for your sake. Let us board a
ship and go beyond the high seas. There are many islands and peninsulas beyond
the seas. Let us reach one of them. For me you are more precious than this
Kingdom.”

“My Lord, you are ready to sacrifice the Kingdom for my sake. Even then won’t
let this low-born girl to climb the ancient Chozha throne. Right?”

Nandini spat fire.

“Look at it this way. Is the Chozha throne more precious for you than me? Then
you loved me only because the Chozha Throne, right? You never loved me. You
loved only the throne and the crown. And the royal life at the Palace. You used
me as a means to get those things, right?”

“Ok, let it be. I want the palace and the royal pleasures. I married
Pazhuvettaraiyar precisely for that. I tried to save Veerapandiyan only for that
reason.”

“Traitor! Evil Woman! Why do you tell his name now?” – Karikalan roared.

Before Nandini could answer his grave charge he spoke again.

“Now I know. Everything now falls in its place. I know your plan. If you tell the
name of Veerapandiyan I will lose my temper and really try to kill you. At that
time one of your slaves – I mean the three young warriors who hanker for you –
will kill me. That is your hidden agenda. You heartless demon! Where is
Vandhiya Thevan? You have hidden him. He should be somewhere here. I now
understand why you refuse to come with me. Yes, Vandhiya Thevan is the
reason. You have planned to elope with him. That is why you don’t want to
come with me. That is the reason you sent Pazhuvettaraiyar away on some lame
excuse. You and Vandhiya Thevan have drawn a meticulous plan. Oh My God!
How was I duped? Where is that crook, Vandhiya Thevan? Where is your brand
new lover?”

Karikalan shouted. Karikalan ran around the room swirling the Pandya sword.
Once he came very close to the place where Vandhiya Thevan was hiding.

Nandini sprang to him and fell at his feet.

“My Lord, please listen to me. May you be blessed forever. Listen to me and
then do whatever you want to do. The charges you have levelled against
Vandhiya Thevan are utterly baseless. Even Mother Earth won’t tolerate them.
And if you hurt Vandhiya Thevan my dear friend Manimekalai will kill herself.
The sin will accrue only to you. Open my heart and see, my Lord. You can use
the Pandya sword to cut open my heart and see for yourself – there is nobody but
you in my heart. I promise. I promise. I promise, my Lord.”

Nandini broke down into a violent sob.

Adithya Karikalan appeared to be a little pacified.

“Then why do you refuse to come with me? Why do you want me to kill you?
Tell me the truth. The whole of it. At least now.”

“Ok, have your way. My heart can’t hold anybody else other than you. That’s an
eternal truth valid for all time. Even then I can’t come with you. Nor can I marry
you. I can’t. There is a strong reason. I came here to Kadambur only to tell that. I
made you come here only for that. After sharing that with you I wanted to beg
your pardon and then go my way. I wanted to beg you to forget this unlucky
orphan and marry somebody who will be right enough for the throne and for
your ancient Chozha clan. But I was a little hesitant. I was afraid. I go weak in
my knees at the mere thought. I know I will be pouring ghee into the fire of your

fury. I am also aware of the havoc which your fury might unleash. If you
promise to remain calm, if you promise to control your emotions.. “

“Tell, Nandini. You will have to tell. However bitter it may be, I promise you I
will bear it. You asked me to forget you and marry somebody else. I was not
angry. I am sure nothing else can affect me. But please don’t make your
imagination work overtime once again.”

“My Lord, even my whole life is a sort of imagination. My birth is a work of
fiction. In order to extend my life a little more and in order to fulfil my karma I
had to create many imaginative stories. There won’t be any need for lies and
imagination from now on. I am going to end my false life this very moment. I
did not want to aggravate your grief. That’s why I did not tell you the truth even
if I knew. I wove many imaginative stories only to make you hate me. I did
many terrible things for the same purpose. I wanted you to do many horrendous
things only to make you hate me. An endless struggle was going on in my mind.
My duty, my vow and my love for you were all great forces fighting with each
other. I can never describe the grief they caused me. Now is the time to end my
struggle. I will tell you the truth about me. You hear that and then kill me with
your own hand. Don’t hurt anybody else. I don’t want any sin to accrue to you
on my account. I don’t want you to be blamed.”

“Sin! Blame! Tell me is there any sin or blame I have not earned? Tell me
Nandini. Tell me the real reason that prevents you from going with me. Tell me
what stands between you and me, obstructing the path of true love. However
frightening may be the truth please don’t hesitate to share it with me. So long as
I was thinking that somebody was hiding behind the screen, so long as I did not
know the identity of the person hiding behind the screen, I was restless. My
mind was on the screen while I was talking to you. Once I knew it was
Manimekalai my mind became clear. So long as the truth is not known we will
have fear, anger, frustration and confusion. Once the truth is known, however
bitter it may be, however unpalatable it may be, our minds would become calm.
We will be at peace.”

“My Lord, may whatever I tell bring peace to your troubled mind. That is my
only prayer. But my message will also make you understand that I can neither
come with you nor marry you. It will also tell you that death is my only
salvation. Death alone cane relieve me from my sorrow. Vandhiya Thevan
brought news about my mother. I knew it is true. I know about the mad woman
roaming in the streets of Lanka. I know she is my mother. Many know this
secret. Because I bear a striking resemblance to my mother. Some even thought
me as my mother. I also came to know what made my mother crazy and furious.
I don’t know if anybody else knows this. I have not told that to anybody. I am
going to tell you for the first time. I am going to tell you who my father is.
Remember the promise you gave me. Don’t give way to anger.”

Nandini had given an elaborate preamble to whatever she was going to tell the
Crown Prince. She came near Adithya Karikalan and in a shivering voice
whispered in his ear “My father is. . . . ..” She then broke down into a sob.

Adithya Karikalan leapt from his place as if a thousand scorpions had stung him
at the same time.

“NO. NO. IT CAN’T BE. NEVER. THAT’S A LIE. A DAMNED LIE. YOU
ARE LYING.”

Karikalan shouted.

But the very next minute he became calm. In a voice that was sadder than angry
he said to Nandini, “ Yes, Nandini. What you said must be true. Everything is
clear now. I now know the war which you fought in your heart. I now realise
how much you should have suffered. Now I know the reason for your

confusion, for your hesitation and for your horrendous request. When you fell at
my feet begging for help, I rejected it. I now realise how inhuman I have been.
Nandini, there is prescribed retribution for many sins; but not for what I have
done. There is no way that we can be united. Oh My God! How did you bear this
great weight in your heart for such a long time? How did you let me live on this
earth? There is only one way to resolve the conflicts of our lives. There is only
one way for atonement. One salvation. One retribution. One punishment. Here it
is.”

Vandhiya Thevan overheard every word of the conversation between Karikalan
and Nandini. Whenever Karikalan became insanely emotional he wanted to
come out. But then he thought that his sudden appearance would cause more
harm than good. The conversation had completely paralysed him. He could not
hear Nandini when she revealed her father’s identity. But he could make a guess.
It would have been conventional to say that he was shocked. Vandhiya Thevan’s
life was full of shocks and surprises; but that was the greatest shock he ever had
in his life.

When Adithya Karikalan accepted Nandini’s statement in a choked voice
Vandhiya Thevan’s emotions knew no bounds. He was not afraid so long as the
Crown Prince was shouting at the top of his voice. But now when he spoke to
her in an uncharacteristic soft voice Vandhiya Thevan trembled. He feared the
worst. He stuck his head out of his hiding place and saw what was happening in
Nandini’s chambers.

Vandhiya Thevan did not see Karikalan and Nandini. He saw something else. He
saw that on the mirror fixed on the wall. He saw an ugly face peering out of the
passage from the Hunters’ Hall. The face belonged to Sorcerer Ravidasan. The
next second the secret door to the Hunters’ Hall opened. A tiger’s head came out
of the door followed by its body. Vandhiya Thevan suddenly felt refreshed. He
was excited. His limbs were raring to go. He tried to spring out of his hiding
place

A hand as strong as the Vajrayudha of Devendra encircled his neck. He looked
up. He saw a majestic Kalamuka towering over him.

‘Who is this? How did he come here? Oh My God! How strong is his hold! My
neck might break. I am gasping. My eyes try to come out of their sockets. If this
continues even for a few more seconds I will die.’

Vandhiya Thevan struggled hard to release himself from the grip. He managed to
squeeze himself out and sprang out of his hiding place. He fell on the floor. He
felt as if a rock has been thrown on his head. A thousand suns, each sending out
billions of light rays appeared before his eyes. Then suddenly the whole place
was enveloped in darkness. Vandhiya Thevan became unconscious.

Vandhiya Thevan was lying in front of the place where the musical instruments
were stored. The hideous figure dressed as a Kalamuka emerged from that
place stepping on Vandhiya Thevan. Nandini heard the sound of somebody
falling and turned around to look. The Kalamuka figure was approaching her
with a drawn sword. She looked at the figure with unbearable surprise. Her eyes
tried to came out of their sockets. Her intestines travelled up to her heart and
throat. She was gasping for breath. She wiped her eyes and looked down.
Karikalan was lying on the floor. Veerapandiyan’s sword was stuck in his body.

A strange sound came out from her. A sound which could neither be called as a
sob or a laugh or a cry of fury came out with so much intensity that even the
inanimate objects in that room shook.

“Evil woman! Traitor! At last you have taken revenge!” The Kalamuka figure
came near Nandini.

Almost at the same time Ravidasan entered the room hiding behind a stuffed
tiger. As soon as he saw the Kalamuka figure he threw away the stuffed animal.
The dead tiger fell on the lamp which was the only source of light for the room.
The lamp fell down. A few seconds before it went off it showed the frightened
face of Manimekalai. Manimekalai screeched and ran away.

Darkness was absolute now. The blinding darkness was accentuated by a
sorrowful sob, a frenzied laugh, and the moans usually heard at the time of
death. The sound of several footsteps was heard.

Chapter 40: I Killed Him

The copper plates discovered in a place called Thiruvaalangaadu in Tamilnadu
describe the history of the Chozha clan. The plates describe the death of Adithya
Karikalan in poetic words:

“Adithyan (refers to Adithya Karikalan; the word Adithyan means the sun)
desired to see the celestial world. A sunset happened. The world was enveloped
in darkness called the ‘Kali’ (refers to Kali yug, the present bad period)”

The great warrior who beheaded Veerapandiyan, the Crown Prince of Chozha
Kingdom had an untimely and unnatural death.

Adithya Karikalan lay dead in a room in Kadambur Palace. The room was dark.
Vandhiya Thevan’s neck was wrung by the person in the guise of a Kalamuka.
He had been pushed to the floor by him. For a while his mind was also dark.
And then slowly the light of consciousness returned to his mind.

His eyes opened; but he could not see anything. The place was absolutely dark.
He did not know where he was. He did not even know his condition.

At first he was aware of a severe pain on his head. He also felt a severe pain in
his neck region, where he was held by the Kalamuka. He had to struggle to
breathe.

But why does my head hurt? Why can’t I breathe? Why does my neck hurt as
hell? Oh My God! That bloody Kalamuka! Did I really see him? Did he try to
kill me by wringing my neck? Why did he do so? Perhaps to prevent me from
screaming. Or perhaps to prevent me from moving. Why? Why? I remember
struggling to get free of him. Where did I want to go?

Oh My God! Now I remember everything. I wanted to go to Adithya Karikalan.
But what happened to him? What happened to Nandini? Did Ravidasan do some
mischief? The Kalamuka tried to stop me from going. He wrung my neck and
pushed me to the floor. What he could have done after that? Where am I right
now? Am I in an underground prison? Or in a subterranean passage? Vandhiya
Thevan strained his eyes and looked around. He could see nothing but the
undifferentiated black mass of pure darkness. Oh My God, is there darkness like
this on this earth? Now I remember. I fell down near the place where they store
the musical instruments. I fell in the floor of the room assigned to the visiting
Junior Queen Nandini. The room is in Kadambur Palace; but am I still there?
Or have I been taken to some other place? How can I know?

He tried to feel around with his hands. His hands got hold of something. What
was that?

It looks like a knife. Yes it is a knife. It’s a knife with a twisting blade. Much
more powerful than the knife with the regular blade. If anybody is attacked at
point blank range with this kind of a knife death is almost certain. I remember
seeing this kind of knife somewhere. Where? In whose hand did I see this kind of
a knife?

He remembered the chain of events that happened since last evening.

How did this knife come here? Its blade is wet. What caused it? Is it water? Or

oil? No. Then it should be blood. Whose blood? My God! Perhaps my own!
Vandhiya Thevan instinctively reached for his back head. He felt his neck. Yes,
he had pain. But there was no sign of bleeding. He did not feel any pain in the
rest of his body.

‘This blade should have drunk the blood of somebody. Whose?’

He had not harmed anyone with that knife. For that matter he had not even
touched that knife. Who could have used it? Idumban Kari? Perhaps he came in
the guise of that Kalamuka. No, it could not be. Idumban Kari did not have such
a large frame.

‘I am hearing foot-steps. Is somebody coming? Should I remain silent or shout at
the top of m voice? Let somebody bring a lamp. It is very dark here. If the visitor
brings in a lamp I can regain my bearings. The visitor is likely to trip on me.’

As soon as the thought came in his mind Vandhiya Thevan sat up. He held the
knife aloft and shouted “Who is there?”

He was surprised by his own voice. He could not recognise his voice. It appeared
to be the voice of somebody else. Perhaps the Kalamuka’s tight grip on his neck
had damaged his vocal chords. It was very difficult to produce any sound.

He wanted to shout once again, ‘Who is there?’. That came out as a grunt. It did
not even remotely resemble a human voice.

The sound of receding footsteps was heard. The visitor must have been
frightened by his voice and hastily retreated.

The thought that he could frighten somebody tickled Vandhiya Thevan. He tried
to laugh. But even the sound of his laugh was strange. It was not his
characteristic laugh. There was no point in sitting at that dark room. He stood up.
His legs were trembling. He ignored that and walked a few steps. He stretched
his hands as far as he could. His hands did not feel any object. He saw something
shining at a distance. It looked like a mirror. It was shining because some light
rays had fallen on that and got reflected.

Vandhiya Thevan remembered. It was the same mirror on which he saw the
image of Ravidasan entering the room carrying a stuffed tiger. Vandhiya Thevan
knew where he was - Nandini’s chambers. But why is the place so dark? Why it
is absolutely silent? What happened to the people in the room?

Vandhiya Thevan struggled hard to walk in darkness. Perhaps if he reached the
door there might be some light. From there he could go out and then ask people
and find out what happened. His foot hit something on the floor. Vandhiya
Thevan lost his balance and fell down. He did not fall on the hard floor; but on
something soft. He was not hurt. The soft object might be the tiger’s skin. He
should have fallen on the stuffed tiger brought by Ravidasan.

The knife in his hand had fallen down somewhere when he tripped. He extended
his hand to look for the knife. His hand fell on something soft. Suddenly his
body shivered. His hairs stood straight. His mind was filled with panic.

‘Is it possible?’ Vandhiya Thevan felt the object with his hand. Yes, it was a
human body. What he felt was the person’s palm. The body should have been
covered by tiger’s skin which should have got detached from its stuffed body. He

threw away the tiger’s skin. He strained his eyes to look at the body. The faint
light rays reflected by the mirror illuminated the object.

’Oh My God, isn’t it the Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan? No, it’s not him. It’s
his dead body. Vandhiya Thevan’s heart came to his throat. His eyes started
shedding tears without his knowing. His hands were trembling when he tried to
feel the Crown Prince. There was no trace of life in him.

Vandhiya Thevan’s hands were drenched in Royal blood that had oozed out from
the body. He remembered Princess Kunthavai. She had sent him on a mission to
save the life of the Crown Prince. Vandhiya Thevan had failed in his mission. It
was a complete failure. How could he ever see her face again? But he had tried
his best. He was ready to give his life and soul to save Karikalan. He had risked
his life many times to warn him. He spared no pain to save Karikalan’s life. But
in the end he failed; destiny won as it did in every encounter with man.

He laid the lifeless body of the Crown Prince on his lap. He did not know what
to do. He had lost the power of thinking. He wanted to shriek in grief. But his
vocal chords had lost their ability to create any sound.

“The Prince is dead. I have failed in my mission. I can’t see Kunthavai again in
my life.”

He was tortured by these repetitive thoughts. He did not know how long he had
been sitting there in that state.

Only when a group of men entered the room with burning torches did he come
back to the present.

He kept down the body of Karikalan and stood up. About ten or twelve people
came through the front door. Two of them were holding torches. Some of them
were armed with a spear. Kandhanmaran led the group followed by his father
Sambuvaraiyar. There was fear in every face. It appeared as if all the men were
struck by a ghost.

While everyone appeared shocked and grief-stricken Kandhanmaran alone
appeared furious. He charged Vandhiya Thevan: “Murderer! Man of Evil!
Betrayer! Traitor! The worst enemy of the Chozha Empire! Why didn’t you flee
with your group? I thought you must have run away.”

He then spoke to his father.

“Father, have a good look at the murderer. The killer who came in the guise of a
friend. The traitor who has brought indelible blame and dishonour to our clan.
See his face. His heinous crime is written in large letters all over his face.”

Sambuvaraiyar ignored his son and went near the body of the Crown Prince. He
was by the head of the body. He stared at the lifeless face of the Prince for a
while.

“What sin did I do? Why should this happen in my house? Oh, Destiny, don’t
you have any mercy? The world will say that I invited the Crown Prince as my
guest only to kill him.”

Sambuvaraiyar hit his head several times and sobbed.

Kandhanmaran tried to pacify his father.

“Father we can’t be blamed. We have caught the assassin red-handed. Do you
see the blood stained knife there? He used that weapon to kill the Prince. When I
came here earlier I did not see him or the knife. He should have tried to flee.
Realising that he was trapped he has come back to the scene of crime. He came
perhaps to make sure that his victim is dead. He was even ready to wring his
neck should there be some life left in the Crown Prince. Tell me father, what
punishment we can give to this bloody traitor, to this worst perpetrator of evil.
No punishment will be adequate for this grave crime.”

Kandhanmaran went on levelling charges.

Vandhiya Thevan had not yet regained his powers of speech.. Kandhanmaran’s
words baffled him. He now realised that given his situation anybody would
consider him the prime suspect in the murder of the Crown Prince.

Oh My God! He says that I stabbed the Crown Prince. Once he accused me of
stabbing him in the back. Now he is sure that I have killed the Prince. That’s the
cruel twist of destiny. Perhaps that Pazhuvur Queen, that venomous reptile,
saved my life two times, only for this. That evil woman has settled her score with
Princess Kunthavai. Where is that heartless devil whose form is beauty? She
would have run away. She would have escaped along with Sorcerer Ravidasan
and other conspirators after having accomplished her mission.

If he did not kill the Crown Prince who did? Nandini? Ravidasan? Or that
Kalamuka? Or perhaps Manimekalai whose face appeared as a flash before
Vandhiya Thevan became unconscious. Or was it Idumban Kari who came in

with that knife with a twisting blade? Or perhaps Kandhanmaran did the crime
out of his lust for Nandini? And having killed the Prince was he smartly trying to
shift the blame on me? Or having heard the mysterious secret about Nandini’s
father did Karikalan kill himself?

Kandhanmaran thundered to his men. “Idiots, what are you waiting for? Arrest
him. NOW”

Only then Vandhiya Thevan knew that he was trapped. He looked at
Kandhanmaran. His eyes were full of love and grief.

“What is this Kandhanmara? Do you think I would have done this heinous
crime? Why should I do that, my friend? What could I have possibly gained
from this lowly act, my friend?”

“Friend? Who is your friend? I am not your friend. The first punishment to you
will be to pluck out that vile tongue of yours which called me as your friend.
You asked what you will gain by this murder. You will gain Nandini’s love. You
will get her. That’s your greatest gain. You villain, where is that Pazhuvur Devil?
Where the hell is Nandini?”

“Honestly Kandhanmara, I don’t know. I was lying here unconscious I don’t
know for how long. I came back a few minutes before you people came in. I
don’t know what happened to Nandini? Perhaps she might have gone out of the
Palace through the underground passage. Four of her men were waiting for her at
the Hunters’ Hall. They are the conspirators, the former personal body guards of
the slain Pandya King Veerapandiyan. Nandini might have gone away with
them.”

“Oh, in the end you too have been deceived by her. But don’t tell me you don’t
know anything. Who will believe you? You were caught in her net of seduction.
You were ready to carry out even her slightest whim. I know. The Crown Prince
also knew. Nandini has also spoken about you to the Crown Prince. You
murdered Adithya Karikalan either at her instigation or to please her. It will be a
sin even to look at your face, you betrayer.”

“I swear Kandhanmara, I did not kill the Crown Prince. I came here with a
mission of saving his life. That mission was entrusted to me by Princess
Kunthavai.”

“You deceived the Crown Prince with her name. Then you killed him by
treachery. Tell me how did you come into this room? And for what?”

“I sensed that the Prince’s life was in danger. I came in to save him. I have failed
in my mission. But it is not my fault. You need not have to believe me. You can
ask your sister Manimekalai. She is the one who.. “

“Fie on you! Don’t talk about my sister. Don’t even tell her name. If you do I
will wring your neck and kill you.”

Kandhanmaran sprang on Vandhiya Thevan. He gripped the ropes that bound his
chest and shoulders and shook them violently.

Then he turned to his father who was mourning beside the lifeless body of
Adithya Karikalan.

“Father, tell me what should we do with him. Tell me how we should punish this
villain who has brought bad name to our clan. If you allow him I will cut him to
pieces here. I will kill him. Speak, Father.”

Sambuvaraiyar was gently feeling the body of the Crown Prince. He was startled
by the words coming out of his son Kandhanmaran. He looked up. His eyes went
beyond his son. He saw some movement in the screen. The next second the
screens were moved away and a figure appeared from behind the screen.
Sambuvaraiyar’s eyes were covered with tears. He could not recognise the figure
coming from behind the screen. When the figure came closer to him he
recognised that as his darling daughter, Manimekalai. Feelings of shock, disgust
and grief clouded his face.

“Manimekalai, how did you come here?”

His words made Kandhanmaran to turn towards her.

“Appa, I have been here all along. Tell my brother not to hurt Vandhiya Thevan.
He is innocent.”

Kandhanmaran erupted.

“Did you see that, Father? Did you see how this evil man has corrupted the mind
of my dear sister? And now she says that he is innocent.”

Kandhanmaran laughed. It was only an expression of uncontrollable fury, not

one of happiness.

“I am sure, Anna. He is blameless.”

Manimekalai remained firm. Kandhanmaran was furious and ashamed at the
same time.

“Shut up, Sister. Who asked you to come here? You should not have come here.
You are not yourself. You have lost your mind. You go to the ladies’ chambers.”

“You are wrong, Anna. I am alert. I am fully aware of what’s happening. I have
not lost my mind. But you have lost yours. Otherwise you would not have
charged this man with the crime of killing the Prince.”

“Scoundrel! Fool! Why do you support this murderer?”

“Because he is not a murderer.”

Kandhanmaran laughed again. The same laugh to express his fury.

“Ok if he is not the murderer then who the hell he is? Who killed the Crown
Prince? Did you?”

“Yes, I did. I killed him. I killed him with this sword.”

Everyone in the room was shocked by that sudden revelation. They exchanged
glances of surprise with one another.

After a few seconds Kandhanmaran left Vandhiya Thevan and ran to his sister.
He saw the sword in her hand.

“Listen, Appa. She could not even lift this sword. If she had really plunged this
sword into Crown Prince’s body do you think she could have retrieved the
sword? See the edge, Father. It is perfectly clean. She is lying to save Vandhiya
Thevan. Why should she bother about him? This scoundrel has corrupted her
mind. See his crime is written on his face.”

Vandhiya Thevan’s face exhibited feelings of surprise, shock and indescribable
grief. He had been silent till then. He spoke in a firm voice devoid of all
emotions.

“Kandhanmara, whatever you say is true. I am the killer. Your sister is lying only
to save me. Whatever she says is nothing but a figment of her imagination.
Princess, I thank you. Even after I die I will never forget the brotherly love you
have for me. But now please listen to your brother. Please go to the ladies’
chambers. Please, Devi. Please.”

Kandhanmaran’s fury reached its zenith. His eyes which had already gone read
now emitted fire.

“Have I gone so low that a crook like you has to intercede on my behalf? She did
not listen to her own brother. Do you think she will obey you? Fat chance. Oh,
you have brotherly love towards her? Fantastic. How come, you are her brother?
Was she born of the same mother as I was? Or was she born to your mother? She
respects you more than she respects me. Why? What did you do to corrupt her
innocent mind? That is reason enough to kill you right here. I will send you to
the Lord of Death before attending to other things. I will kill you with the sword
that is in my sister’s hands. I am sure that will make you happy. Right?”

Kandhanmaran wielded the sword and sprang on Vandhiya Thevan.

Chapter 41: Fire! Fire!

Kadambur Sambuvaraiyar who had almost frozen near the Prince’s dead body
now stood up, sprung on his son and firmly held his hand.

“Idiot! What the hell are you doing?”

“Father, what’s wrong in killing a traitor?”

“Idiot. If you kill him then you, I and the entire Sambuvaraiyar clan will be
annihilated. The whole world will say that we killed the Crown Prince and his
friend, Vandhiya Thevan who came to save his life. How can you be so dumb?”

“Who will dare to blame us, Father? If anybody dares I will kill him.”

“Idiot, Idiot. When the hell are you going to grow up? Is this the time to show
your audacity? I am a greater fool than you. I listened to your advice. That’s
why this great calamity happened in our home. It was you who invited the
Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and the other Chieftains. It was at your instance that
Prince Madhuranthakan came here secretly. Now the whole world knows that
through your dear friend. It was you who brought Adithya Karikalan from
Kancheepuram. I never thought it would come to this. Do you know that
Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman, our old enemy, is waiting at our borders with a
huge army? How are we going to explain the death of Crown Prince to him?
Pazhuvettaraiyar is not here now. How are we going to manage things?”

Sambuvaraiyar hit his head several times.

Now there were tears in Kandhanmaran’s eyes.

“Father, please don’t grieve. Let me be punished for what I did. I am at your feet.
Tell me what should be done. I am waiting for your orders, Father.”

“First take this girl to the Ladies Chambers. If she tries to speak gag her, bind her
limbs and leave her there. Or else place her in a secret room. And come here.”

Manimekalai trembled seeing the angry face of her father. She knew that
Vandhiya Thevan was out of danger. At least she thought so.

She spoke in a pleading voice.

“Please forgive me, Father. I will never go against your word. Let not
Kandhanmaran touch me. I will go to the Ladies Chambers on my own.”

She did not wait for her father’s response. She quickly walked out of the room.
Kandhanmaran followed her.

Once they were out of earshot Sambuvaraiyar barked orders to his men.

“Bind this man to the legs of the cot.”

Vandhiya Thevan did not resist. After he was bound he spoke to Sambuvaraiyar
in a soft voice.

“Sir, I am Karikalan’s personal friend. What can I gain by murdering my dear
friend? The assassins have escaped through the underground passage. Instead of
punishing me first try to catch them. I have seen them. If you release me I will
come with you and help you find those people. I promise you I will never try to
run away.”

“Let’s assume that you are telling the truth. Tell me what were you doing when
Karikalan was killed? Were you looking at the grand spectacle?”

“Nandini and Karikalan were talking. Suddenly the assassins entered the room. I
tried to stop them. A Kalamuka who had a frightening appearance wrung my
neck. I became unconscious. When I came back to my senses I saw the lifeless
body of the Crown Prince lying by my side.”

Abig noise was heard from outside the Kadambur Palace. It appeared as if
thousands of people were shouting angrily.

Sambuvaraiyar strained his ears to listen to the noise. Then he spoke to Vandhiya
Thevan.

“Let’s assume that you are telling the truth. Even then you may have to stay here

for some time. Give company to your dear friend, Adithya Karikalan. Let me go
and find out what the noise is all about. I will come back and hear your
arguments again.”

Sambuvaraiyar left the room. His men followed him. The room was bolted from
outside as per the orders of Sambuvaraiyar.

As the room plunged into darkness once again, Vandhiya Thevan’s heart plunged
into grief. He remembered what happened when he came to the same
Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace a few months ago. He remembered seeing a comet on
the skies. He remembered what the people said about that bad omen. Everybody
thought that the comet predicted the end of Emperor Sundara Chozhan. The
Emperor had been ill for a long time. The prediction of his end was in a way
natural and reasonable. It was that prediction which fuelled the discussion on the
question of Emperor’s successor. People talked about their next King. The
Chieftains of Chozha Kingdom assembled in this same palace to resolve the
issue of succession to their advantage. What happened in reality belied all
expectations.

The young and valiant Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan is dead. His lifeless
body is here in this room. The sick Sundara Chozhan is still alive. But how long
will he live? Will he live after he knows about the death of his first born, Adithya
Karikalan? Oh My God!

The Emperor badly wanted to see his son. The son’s love for his father though
not expressed properly most of the time, bordered on devotion. He built a palace
of gold not for himself but for his father, the Emperor. The son wanted to receive
his father at the golden palace and offer him the best of Royal hospitality the
world had ever seen. But that was not to be. The son’s life-long dreams have
been frustrated. The Crown Prince was not fortunate enough to receive his
parents in the golden palace he lovingly built for them.

Oh My God, this death would lead to chaos and catastrophe. Nobody knew how
this would be viewed by the subjects and the warring chieftains. The entire
Chozha Empire will be plunged into grief because of the untimely death of the
Crown Prince. A major civil war will erupt between the Chieftains. The ruckus
that was heard a few minutes ago must be because of Malaiyaman’s army. Why
did they shout? Why were they furious? Were they going to invade the
Kadambur Palace? Why? What for?

Perhaps news about Karikalan’s death would have reached them. How would
Sambuvaraiyar manage the crowd? How would he face Malaiyaman’s army? He
would shift the blame on Vandhiya Thevan to save his skin. But would
Malaiyaman believe him? Even if he did he would not let Sambuvaraiyar go
free, for the murder had happened right inside the latter’s Palace. He must also
know about the Conspirators Assembly convened in the same Palace a few
months ago. Even if he had not known that earlier he would have known it
through Azhwarkkadian who went to warn him against Sambuvaraiyar. That was
why Malaiyaman was coming to Kadambur with a large army. Vandhiya Thevan
knew how deeply Malaiyaman loved his grand son Adithya Karikalan. Vandhiya
Thevan could guess how he would react to the death news. Malaiyaman would
annihilate the Sambuvaraiyar’s clan and would burn down his Palace.

Poor soul, Kandhanmaran! He was basically good. He was my best friend. But
all his love turned into hatred. All because of that Pazhuvur Queen, devil of a
woman, Nandini. But her story too was in a way very sad. Vandhiya Thevan did
not have the heart to shift the entire blame on Nandini. It was all the play of
Destiny, concluded Vandhiya Thevan.

Destiny! The cruel hand of destiny did not spare anybody. How could one
describe Manimekalai’s destiny? Why should she love him so much? Why
should be shift the blame on herself to save me? Was there anything in this world
which is even remotely equal to such a divine love? How was he going to repay
that kindness?

Vandhiya Thevan laughed at his own joke.

Why should I bother about repaying her kindness? What’s the big deal in my
worrying about others? Nobody in the world will be as pathetic as me now. They
are going to charge me with the heinous crime of killing Adithya Karikalan in
cold blood. I don’t have any evidence to refute the charge. Nandini, Ravidasan
and his gang must have already fled the scene. Nobody tried to follow them.
Even if they were caught how am I going to prove that I am not part of that
murderous gang? No way.

What kind of punishment will they give me for murdering the Crown Prince?
They won’t just kill me and be done with that. They will torture me. The
punishment given to me will be so severe that nobody in the world can think of a
similar crime. Let them torture me. Let them make my life a living hell. I don’t
care. Princess Kunthavai and Prince Arulmozhivarman will think that I killed
their brother. I can’t think of a more painful torture or a more stinging disgrace
than that. There cannot be a more painful torture or a more stinging disgrace
than that.

God, during the past three, four months you saved me from many dangers. I am
not afraid to die. But save me from this great disgrace. Please, my Lord.

Thoughts came in quick succession in Vandhiya Thevan’s mind as waves would
come in a sea. He lost all sense of time. He did not know how long he remained
bound to the leg of a cot in that dark room bolted from outside.

Vandhiya Thevan’s thoughts were interrupted by the appearance of smoke.
Gradually the room was enveloped in a screen of smoke. What caused the

smoke? Vandhiya Thevan explored all the possibilities.

A few minutes passed. A little light entered the room. Vandhiya Thevan could
see Adithya Karikalan’s lifeless body in that light. All the doors of the room
were closed. So the light could not have come from a lamp. Then what was the
source of light? Vandhiya Thevan looked carefully around him. Why should
smoke and light come from the adjacent Hunters’ Hall? Was there a fire
perhaps? The conspirators who fled through the Hunters’ Hall must have set it on
fire. Vandhiya Thevan remembered Manimekalai carrying a lamp when they
went into the Hunters’ Hall. That must have fallen somewhere and must have
started the fire. Perhaps.

Smoke became thicker and thicker. The room became hotter with every passing
minute. Vandhiya Thevan could see the flames through the gaps in woodenplank walls that separated the room from the Hunters’ Hall. In a few minutes the
fire entered that room in a state of uncontrolled fury.

Vandhiya Thevan was looking at the entering fire without batting his eye-lids. At
first he was excited.

‘All my worries will be burnt down by the Lord of Fire. My dear friend and the
Crown Prince, Adithya Karikalan and I are going to be cremated in the same
place.

But the excitement lasted only for a second.

I don’t want to leave the world with the charge of killing the Crown Prince stuck
to my name. Sambuvaraiyar and his son will twist the facts to blame me. I don’t

care how many people will believe the words of Sambuvaraiyars. Ponniyin
Selvan and Princess Kunthavai should not think that I killed their brother. I have
to prove my innocence at least for them if not for anybody else.

Adithya Karikalan was a born warrior. He is of royal lineage. He is the Crown
Prince of the mighty Chozha Kingdom. He deserves a grand funeral. His
parents, his brother, his sister and thousands of his friends should see his body
for one last time. I failed in my mission to save his life. Let me at least save his
body. I should ensure that a funeral that befits the first born of a reigning
Emperor is given to my friend Adithya Karikalan.’

Till then Vandhiya Thevan did not try to free himself. He did not even examine
how he was bound. He did now. First his hands were bound together. And the
same rope went all over his body and then to the leg of the cot. He could neither
look up nor look down. He used all his strength to untie the rope that bound his
hands. He even used his teeth to cut the rope. He failed. He then tried to remove
the ropes on his body. He could not do that either. But when he moved his body
the cot also moved with him. He had a flash. He dragged himself and along with
him the cot and moved towards the entrance of the Hunters’ Hall. That was
easier said than done. He had to move inch by inch. When he dragged the cot the
ropes became tighter over his body and hurt him more. He bore his pain
patiently and managed to reach the entrance of the Hall. The flames were trying
to escape through the gaps in the closed door. He lifted his hand and showed the
ropes to the flames. The dry rope caught fire. Fire hurt his hands as well. The
pain was unbearable. But it yielded result. The ropes could not withstand the
onslaught of fire. They gave away. He freed his hands and then his body. Before
he could free himself the screens on the cot got fire. The room was enveloped in
thick smoke. Vandhiya Thevan felt as if his whole body was burning. At first
there was irritation in his eyes. Then tears rolled out. And then his eyesight
began to fade.

‘Oh My God! I too will burn with the Crown Prince. In a way it is better. I could
not save him. Let me at least have the honour of dying with him.

‘No, what is this cowardice. I don’t care about my life. But if the Prince’s body is
burnt here then the stigma of a murderer will forever be stuck to my name.
People who know me will curse me whenever they think of me. Why should I die
such a dishonourable death? I will give my life to somehow carry the Prince’s
body outside the Palace. I shall entrust the body to the Prince’s grandfather
Malaiyaman. I will promise him that I will give my life to find out the assassins.
If I die after I accomplish that mission it is all right. I would have lived well.

Vandhiya Thevan was free now. The cot was burning. The heat was unbearable.
He could not open his eyes. Even if he did he could not see anything in that
smoke-infested room. Where was he going to find the Prince’s body? Vandhiya
Thevan stretched his hand trying to feel the corpse. But he could not find it. He
moved a little and explored with his hands. The search lasted only a few
minutes. It appeared to him as if he had been searching for aeons. Finally his
hands touched the lifeless body of the Prince. He lifted the body up and placed it
on his shoulder.

It was only then that Vandhiya Thevan mulled over the exit options. It was
impossible to go through the Hunters’ Hall. The stuffed animals which
generations of Sambuvaraiyars had gathered would have fuelled the raging fire.
Going through the Hunters’ Hall was ruled out. The fire was only on the side of
Hunters’ Hall. The next best option was to use the normal exit door of that room.
But that was bolted from outside. He kicked. He screamed.

“FIRE! FIRE! ANYBODY THERE! PLEASE OPEN THE DOOR!”

Nothing happened.

‘I have been a perfect fool, thought Vandhiya Thevan.

‘Why not I use the exit route from the place where musical instruments are
stored? But by this time the fire would have spread there. Then there is no other
way. God, please help me.

Now the room was very bright. But the light was perfectly useless as it was
covered by smoke. Vandhiya Thevan could not open his eyes. Even if he strained
to look he could not see anything. He did not even know which direction he was
headed. He vaguely remembered the direction of the store room. He ran towards
his destination with the dead body of Karikalan still on his shoulders.

He stepped on something on the way. It made a metallic sound. Vandhiya
Thevan remembered. It was the knife with a twisting blade. There should be
some mystery attached to that knife. Vandhiya Thevan decided to take that knife
with him. If somebody attacked him on the way he needed something to defend
himself.

When he bent down to take the knife a ball of flame fell on his shoulders. It hurt.
He tossed it away and reached the store room. One of his hands was holding the
body of the Prince. It was difficult to hold the body and climb the steps leading
to the store room. The door on the top was closed. He had to open the door with
both his hands. He placed the Prince’s body on the floor and went up the steps to
open the door. Standing in the middle of the stairs he bent down to take the body
of the Prince. By that time fire had reached the store room. If only he had
delayed a few more minutes his only exit option would have been sealed.

Vandhiya Thevan reached the terrace and tossed the body of Karikalan on the
floor. He was half-dead. He had been in fire and smoke for quite some time. The
night breeze hugged his exhausted body. He was tempted at first to stay there for

a while and relax. He abandoned the idea forthwith. No, it was dangerous to wait
at that place even for a few seconds. The whole building was on fire. Nobody
knew when the roof would fall down and the entire building would collapse into
a heap of debris.

He lifted the body of Karikalan on his shoulders and walked fast along the
terrace. He used the same way which he used on an earlier occasion. He crossed
many yards and balconies. Last time he was alone. He could jump from a low
lying terrace and then scale the wall and jump on the other side. But now he was
exhausted. And he was carrying the body of the Prince.

He heard human voices beyond the walls. His strained his ears to hear the
voices. What was happening? Have Malaiyaman’s soldiers started invading the
Fort? The soldiers were mounting their attack on the main gates of the Fort.
Several soldiers were jumping the wall from outside.

Perhaps Malaiyaman knew that his grandson has been killed inside the Palace.
That might have made him order an invasion. But if those soldiers see me
carrying the dead body of the Prince? They will think that I killed the Prince.
They will tear me to pieces. I will have to be careful. Nobody should see me. I
should find out Malaiyaman and hand over his grandson’s body to him. Then let
them kill me.

Vandhiya Thevan was abundantly careful now. He walked along the terrace
hiding in the dark, shady places, and beneath the towering balconies. Finally he
reached the place from which he first saw the Conspirators Assembly being held
in that Palace a few months ago.

But how was he going to get down from the terrace? He looked around for a
solution. He saw a ladder placed against the wall closed to where he was

standing. A human figure was waiting near the ladder.

Who is it? The person must be waiting for somebody living in the Palace. Why is
he waiting with a ladder? What if I use the ladder to get down? Come, what may.
I don’t have any other way to get down to level ground. I have to use the ladder.
Thank God I am now armed with a knife. I can handle any situation.’

At this time the sound coming from the gates of the Fort increased. The man
standing near the gate went a little farther away to find out the reason. Vandhiya
Thevan used the window of opportunity and quickly got down from the ladder.
The moment his feet touched the ground the man who had stood guard there
returned to his position.

“Sami, why are you late?”

Vandhiya Thevan immediately recognised the voice. It belonged to one of the
conspirators, Idumban Kari. He also guessed the identity of the person for whom
Idumban Kari was waiting so long.

Idumban Kari came near Vandhiya Thevan.

“Oh My God! Is that you? Who do you have on your shoulder?”

“Yes it’s me. The disciple of Kalamuka. He sent me ahead with the sacrifice
intended for Rana Bhadrakali. He is coming behind me. He wanted you to wait
for him with the ladder. He wanted me to show this knife to you as proof of

identity.”

Vandhiya Thevan showed the knife with the twisting blade.

Idumban Kari was still doubtful.

“You never told me that you are Sami’s disciple. That’s all right. But why does
he still delay? We don’t have all the time in the world. How are going to get out
of this Palace? Malaiyaman’s army has surrounded the Palace. The soldiers have
started jumping the walls.”

“So what? It is easy for us to escape when there is a large crowd. You don’t have
to teach these things to my Master. He will find out a way. You wait for him
here. Tell him that I will be in the garden.”

Vandhiya Thevan did not wait for Idumban Kari’s response. He walked fast. As
soon as he was out of Idumban Kari’s vision he changed his course and started
walking towards the main gate of the Fort.

Chapter 42: Malaiyaman’s Grief

As soon as Sambuvaraiyar reached the front gates of his Palace he spoke to his
son in a conspiratorial whisper.

“My dear son, our clan is facing an unprecedented danger. There is only one way
for us to escape from this. You should do whatever I ask you to do. Implicit
obedience is what I want from you now. There is no time for debates or
arguments.”

Karikalan’s sudden death had shaken Kandhanmaran. He realised that he was
about to commit a great blunder of killing Vandhiya Thevan.

“Father, all this happened because of my foolishness. Please forgive me, Father. I
am now waiting for your orders. I will give my life to execute them.”

“You should get out of this Palace right now. In my bed chamber, just beneath
my cot, there is an underground passage which you know. That will meet the
passage from the Hunters’ Hall near the Palace wall.”

“Father, how can I leave you like this and flee for my life?”

“You have forgotten your promise so soon. Yes, you have to go. You are the only
one remaining in the hoary clan of Val Vil Ori of Kolli Hills. If there is a need
you can hide for some time in Kolli Hills. You should come back only when it is

sure that Madhuranthakan will be crowned. In any case don’t come out of your
hiding till you hear from me.”

“Please forgive me, Father. I can’t be a fugitive. I can’t hide myself to save my
life. That is impossible. Do you want to have a coward in the glorious clan
which came from Val Vil Ori? I will lay down my life for you, this very second.
But I cannot live in hiding. I cannot run away from the enemies.”

Sambuvaraiyar thought for a while.

“I tempted you with an easy way out only to test you, my son. I am happy to
know that you don’t want to go into hiding or flee from the battle-scene. You
want to indulge in acts of valour even though your life may be at risk. I am going
to entrust one such act to you. You go out of the Palace through the underground
passage. Don’t go to Kolli Hills. Go to Thanjavur. The Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar
might be there. Tell him what happened here. If he is not there tell Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar and Prince Madhuranthakan.”

“What should I tell them, Father?”

“A dumb question, my son. Tell them about the death of Karikalan. Tell them
that whatever we had planned to do had happened due to other causes. And this
is the right time to crown Prince Madhuranthakan. Malaiyaman and the
Kodumbalur Chieftain might stand in our way. We should gather all our forces
and vanquish them.”

“If they ask me how did Karikalan die, what shall I tell them Father?”

“Tell the truth. Tell them that Vandhiya Thevan killed him. There is another
important thing you will have to remember. Vandhiya Thevan had been to
Srilanka. He has moved with Prince Arulmozhivarman. He has seen Princess
Kunthavai at Pazhaiyaarai. We just got news that Prince Arulmozhivarman had
been hiding in Nagapattinam and has come out just now. We need to spread
rumours that Prince Arulmozhivarman sent Vandhiya Thevan to kill Adithya
Karikalan. We should make people believe this rumour. We should also tell
people that Princess Kunthavai was an accomplice in this treacherous act. Tell
these to the Pazhuvettaraiyars and Madhuranthakan.”

“Father whatever you said may be true as well. Vandhiya Thevan betrays his
friends. He must have come with that evil intention to our Palace.”

“Perhaps, yes. But the Pazhuvur Queen has gone missing. We should find out
the reason for her sudden disappearance. Vandhiya Thevan is accusing her and
her accomplices, the former bodyguards of the slain Pandya King
Veerapandiyan.”

“The guilty will always try to shift the blame. I now understand everything.
Listen to me, Father. Pazhaiyaarai Princess always hated the Pazhuvur Queen.
She should have made plans to kill the Prince and abduct the Pazhuvur
Queen.The Chief Minister is also on her side. That is why they have sent
Vandhiya Thevan. We ought to have been careful, Father. We have been cheated
by those cunning crooks.”

“Kandhanmara, let’s not worry about the past. Let’s think about the future. You
need to leave here right now. Before the death news of Karikalan reaches the
ears of the Emperor, before the Crown Prince’s death becomes widely known,
Pazhuvettaraiyars and Madhuranthakan should know. Only then they can plan
the future course of action. Go fast. I hope you remember there is a secret

passage to the Thanjavur Fort as well.”

“I know.”

“Then go. At once.”

“I shall leave, Father. I am a little worried about my sister Manimekalai.”

“You need not have to worry about her. I won’t let her talk to anybody else. I
won’t let her open her mouth. And if she tried I will kill her with my own
hands.”

“I am worried precisely about that, Father. I am worried about your anger.”

“Don’t worry. I know how to change her mind. How strange are the ways of
Destiny? First we decided to get her married to Prince Madhuranthakan. Then
we changed our mind and wanted her to marry Karikalan. Now Karikalan is
dead. Thank God the silly girl’s mind did not go to the Crown Prince. We can
now get her married to Madhuranthakan as we decided originally.”

“But Father, Manimekalai has lost her heart to that crook, Vandhiya Thevan.”

“That’s nothing, my son. Manimekalai is not old enough to know what is in her
mind. I will take care of her. Go, my son. Don’t delay for even a second.”

Kandhanmaran heard the sound of the approaching army of Malaiyaman very
close by.

“Father, it seems that Malaiyaman’s army has come very near. What did the old
man say when you met him in the evening?”

“I gave him good news. He was happy to know that Manimekalai was going to
be married to Karikalan. On the same day he wanted to marry off his grand
daughter to Karikalan. Doesn’t that sound nice? I welcomed him to our Palace.
He told me that he will come tomorrow at an auspicious time. Perhaps his
soldiers are celebrating the marriage announcement.”

Sambuvaraiyar tried to smile. But the smile stopped midway.

“Come, my son. Let me come with you till you reach the secret passage. You
should not stop even for a second the way. Get a horse on the way and go fast.”

Sambuvaraiyar took a lamp in his hand. The father and son entered the
subterranean passage beneath Sambuvaraiyar’s bed. As soon as Kandhanmaran
crossed the palace wall Sambuvaraiyar hugged him and blessed him for the
journey.

“Do you need the lamp, son?”

“No, Father. I can manage. I know the way. I can go through the way even if I

am blindfolded.”

As soon as his son went out of his vision Sambuvaraiyar turned around. He
entered the Hunters’ Hall on the way. He strained his ears to listen for any noise
coming out of the hall. No sound was heard. He hesitated for a second. Then he
let out a long sigh as if he had taken a decision on a painful issue. He kept the
lamp at the proper place and went back to his room.

He then went into the area where the ladies’ chambers were housed. The
womenfolk were shaken. Many of them were crying. Kandhanmaran had
dropped Manimekalai there some time ago. They all knew about Karikalan’s
death from her.

“Ladies, a great calamity has struck our clan. You may have to leave the Palace
any time. You should be ready. You should be prepared to spend several days
and nights over the hills, forests and villages. Take your dresses and jewels and
assemble in the court yard. I should not hear anybody lamenting, crying or
sobbing. I should not hear any sound from you, women. Got it?”

Sambuvaraiyar then came to the front gates of his palace. He wanted to climb
the tower to ascertain what was happening outside the walls of the palace. But he
did not have the chance to do so. Even as he approached the front entrance
Malaiyaman’s soldiers broke open the huge gates and were coming in. The
guards could not stop them. The guards were outnumbered and overpowered.
Many of them fell down in their attempts to block the invaders.

Some soldiers had scaled the walls and were jumping in the front yard.

Sambuvaraiyar, who was calm and calculative till them, was shaken. Perhaps
Malaiyaman knew about Karikalan’s death. How was it possible? What was the
big deal? He would know sooner or later. But the invaders had to be controlled at
least for some time. Enough if he got half an hour’s time. By then what he had
planned for would have happened.

Sambuvaraiyar stood majestically in the yard between the gates of the Fort and
the main entrance of his palace. He held a sharp, shining sword in his right hand.
Behind him stood about eight soldiers all armed with spears. Some held large
torches.

Soldiers were entering the gates of the Fort in droves. Behind them came
Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman and Parthibendra Pallavan.

Parthibendran saw Sambuvaraiyar in the main yard and pointed him out to
Malaiyaman.

“Sambuvaraiya, what do I hear? I never thought you’ll stoop to that level. What
is this you are wielding a sword? What is your intention?”

“I am asking the same question to you. What is your intention? Why did you
break open the gate and enter my Palace by force? A little while ago I came to
you and invited you into my Palace with due reverence. You said you will come
tomorrow at an auspicious time.”

“Sambuvaraiya, the auspicious time has come a little too early. That’s why I
advanced my visit. Where is Adithya Karikalan? Where is the greatest warrior
who beheaded Veerapandiyan? Where is the valiant soldier who won at the

Sevur Battlefield? Where is my grandson?”

“How do I know? Why do you ask me? Do you think that I can control him? He
will be in any place he likes. How can I talk sense to that ruffian? I have stopped
talking to him. I told you so. And I have told Parthibendran too.”

“I warn you Sambuvaraiya! Don’t play games with me. Don’t try to fool me.
Entrust my Adithya Karikalan to me. We will go away. Or else, we will demolish
your Fort, your Palace and your armoury. Don’t tell me I have not warned.” –
Malaiyaman roared like an offended lion.

“Parthibendra, what is this old man talking? Has he lost his mind? Who am I to
entrust the Prince to him? Who is he, by the way? Have I imprisoned the Prince?
Or is he planning to arrest and imprison the Crown Prince?”

Parthibendran talked in a conciliatory tone.

“Sambuvaraiyar, please don’t get excited. There is a reason for the old man’s
fury. Have a look at this palm leaf. You will know.”

He gave a palm leaf to Sambuvaraiyar who read it in the light coming from the
torch held behind him.

“Prince Adithya Karikalan’s life is in danger. Come at once with a large army.”

Even while reading the message Sambuvaraiyar sweated. He trembled in the
same manner he did when he first saw the dead body of Adithya Karikalan.

“What is this conspiracy? Who could have written this message?”
Sambuvaraiyar groped for words.

“That is not the question. Bring Adithya Karikalan here right now. Or else take
us there. Or else I’ll ask my soldiers to search for him. “

“Ok I will take you to Karikalan. Parthibendra, you know the place. I learnt that
he has gone to Pazhuvur Queen’s chambers a little while ago. You take this old
man there.”

“I know the place, Thatha. I will take you there.”

Parthibendran turned towards the direction of Nandini’s lodgings.

“Oh My God! What is this?” He screamed. He saw a raging fire in the place
which housed Nandini’s lodgings. There was a thick black screen of smoke
above the flames.

Everybody looked in that direction.

“Fire! Fire!” Everybody shouted.

Parthibendran was the first to come out the shock.

“Sambuvaraiyar, I did not believe this message first. But now I do. I am sure
there is a grave conspiracy behind all these. Patta! Ask your soldiers to arrest
these conspirators. Let me go in search of the Prince.”

Sambuvaraiyar retorted in a highly confident voice.

“Yes, Parthibendra there has been a grave conspiracy. I don’t deny it. But you are
the perpetrators. You broke open my Palace gates and entered by force. You
made your men set fire to my Palace. If the Crown Prince is in danger it must be
because of you. Beware! You may have to pay for all these someday.”

Parthibendran ignored his threats and ran towards Nandini’s chambers. At the
same time the womenfolk of Sambuvaraiyar’s palace came out to the court yard.
Their facial expressions betrayed their states of mind. But none of them cried or
sobbed.

Some of them were distracted by the fire raging in the rear portion of the Palace.
They hugged each other with their hands pointing out the raging fire.
Manimekalai saw the fire.

“Oh My God! It’s fire over there. He is there.”

She screamed and rand in the direction of the fire.

Sambuvaraiyar stopped her. He slapped her violently on her face. Nobody had
hit Manimekalai ever since her birth. Sambuvaraiyar’s darling daughter froze in
her place staring at her father.

The sight melted the father.

“Foolish girl! Didn’t I warn you? Why are you hell-bent on making me angry?”

He saw a strange sight and burst out in sheer exasperation.

“Look there. There is no need to run. See who is coming.”

Vandhiya Thevan was dragging himself towards the crowd. He still bore the
lifeless body of Karikalan on his shoulder.

Malaiyaman who was following the conversation between Sambuvaraiyar and
his daughter now turned to see Vandhiya Thevan. He saw him staggering
towards him. He saw him carrying somebody on his shoulder. He lapsed into a
pointless stare. His old body trembled for no reason. A sense of panic gripped his
heart. He wanted to ask something to Vandhiya Thevan. But he could not raise
his voice. His tongue stuck to his upper jaw.

Vandhiya Thevan wobbled towards Malaiyaman without taking his eyes off his
face.

“Here is Adithya Karikalan. The matchless warrior who beheaded the Pandya
King Veerapandiyan. I tried to bring him alive to you. But I failed. I struggled
hard to save his body from being burnt by the fire. Look at your grandson. He
was killed by his own destiny and by the conspiracy of evil-doers. “

Vandhiya Thevan took the body of Karikalan from his shoulders and made it lie
on the yard. Vandhiya Thevan collapsed and fell down with a thud.

The old man, Malaiyaman, sat near the body of the Prince. He stared at the
valiant, handsome face of his grandson. His body convulsed in violent sobs. It
appeared that a huge mountain was being shaken by a violent storm. At last a big
cry “Aiyoo” came out from his mouth. It tore into the darkness of the night and
echoed against the skies. The sound resembled that of the waves in a turbulent
ocean.

His hit his head and chest with his iron-like hands and was sobbing violently.

“Karikala, my dearest! I have been holding on to my life only to see you as a
bride-groom. I never thought in my wildest dreams that I will see you like this.”

He screamed so loud that even the directions trembled in fear.

The grand old man listed out the events starting from the birth of Adithya
Karikalan. He remembered the celebration he had in his Kingdom to mark his
birth. He remembered how the young child Karikalan played with him. He
remembered bearing the child on his shoulders, hands and on his lap. He

remembered the time when he taught the art of handling a sword and a spear to
his grandson. He recited the acts of valour of the sixteen year old Karikalan at
the Sevur Battlefield.

“Oh My God! You should have died when you fought with the Pandyas. You
would have reached the heaven reserved for the bravest of the brave. Instead you
have become a prey to the conspiracy hatched by this crook Sambuvaraiyan and
his men. Aiyoo, I was the one who sent you as a guest to this Palace. I have
become very old. I wanted you to have new friends. That was why I sent you
here. I naively thought that I was sending you into Sambuvaraiyan’s palace. I
have actually sent you to the house of the Death Lord. I am guilty. I killed you,
my dear grandson. I killed you.”

He hit his head again and again and sobbed.

Suddenly his grief turned into fury. He looked around.

“Sambuvaraiya, tell me the truth. How did the Prince die? How did you trick
him to death? My grandson would have faced even the Chief of gods face to
face. Tell me how many men did you send to kill him? How did they hide
themselves and killed this greatest warrior of our times? Don’t try to hide
anything from me.”

Sambuvaraiyar’s fury was no less.

“Hey old man, I am silent because I want to respect your old age. How could I
know about the Prince’s death? I don’t know anything more than you do. Ask the
man who carried the Prince’s corpse. He might be able to tell you something.

What’s the point in asking me?”

“The Prince died while he was a guest in your palace. And you talk as if you
know nothing. Who will believe you? I am not bothered. Tomorrow when our
Emperor asks you this question give the same answer to him. Soldiers, arrest this
Sambuvaraiyan. Demolish his Palace, his Fort, the walls everything. Let them all
be razed to the ground. Come on, quick.”

Malaiyaman thundered.

Parthibendran had just returned from his exploration.

“Sir, we don’t have to demolish the palace. The Fire Lord will do it for us. See,
he has already started the work in all earnestness.”

Malaiyaman looked around. The fire which till then appeared in the corner of the
Palace was advancing fast. The fire was quite huge. It consumed the high rise
buildings, the towers and the balconies. It was still hungry. It extended a
thousand reddish tongues to look for more food. Malaiyaman’s soldiers froze on
seeing the wild dance of fire.

“The Fire Lord is working for us. Parthibendra, let us leave the place
immediately. Emperor Sundara Chozhan, the King of the three worlds, has been
wanting to see his first born for the last three years. He has been sending
message after message. My daughter Vanamadevi has been sending word to me
to bring her son to her. Nothing happened. Let them at least see the lifeless body
of their son for one last time. The fire that is destroying this evil man’s palace is
tainted. Let us not burn our Prince’s body in that fire. Let’s take our Prince to

Thanjavur. Let us place him in the central court hall of the Palace before the
Emperor. Let the father and mother at least cry over the lifeless body of their
darling son. Let our Emperor decide on the punishment to be given to those
wicked people who killed our valiant Prince.”

Chapter 43: At The Banks of Coleroon Again...

At a village called Thirunaraiyur on the northern banks of River Coleroon was
the Ashram of the great Saivite Saint, Nambiyandar Nambi. There was a Royal
Palanquin and a few soldiers at the gates of the Ashram. There was a crowd of
villagers at a distance. It appeared that two persons were exchanging heated
arguments while the crowd was looking on.

The fight was between two familiar characters of the story. One was Thirumalai
also known as Azhwarkkadian Nambi. The other was the Saivite with whom
Azhwarkkadian had a heated argument while crossing River Coleroon in a boat.
The Saivite was a kind of manager in the Ashram of Nambiyandar Nambi.

Queen Mother Sembianmadevi had sought private audience with Nambiyandar
Nambi. The Manager came out of the Ashram to afford complete privacy to the
Queen Mother. When he saw Azhwarkkadian his bottled up fury tried to find an
expression. He remembered the stinging defeat he had at the hands of the
Vaishnavite fanatic last time.

“Hey, the One who defrauds the town with your religious symbols! What
brought you here? Why don’t you go in search of Pongal and Puliyodharai?””

“I have been eating those delicious dishes almost everyday. I learnt that you
people in this mutt are eating nothing but the holy ash and that your bodies are
unusually bloated. Poor souls, nobody can blame you. Your Lord did not have
enough food to eat. That was why he drank poison. If my Lord’s sister Uma
Maheswari had not held his neck tight what would have happened to your
Lord?”

“Stop that nonsense, Vaishnava Fanatic. Don’t try to fly high all the time. Your
Lord flew higher and higher and yet he could not see Lord Shiva’s head and
came back defeated.”

“Forget that story, man. When my Lord took the avatar of Vamana and measured
the entire earth by a step and the skies by another, your Lord’s head must have
been under my Lord’s foot.”

“Judging by the number of times your Lord was born in this world – ten by the
last count – you should know his weaknesses. My God! What kind of births they
were! Your Lord was born as a fish, as a tortoise.. .”

“Admit your ignorance. Why was he born as a fish? To retrieve the four Vedas
which remained submerged in the depths of the ocean. That’s why one of our
Azhwars laments : “My Lord, I don’t want to be born as a god in heaven
enjoying the company of celestial nymphs. Nor do I want to be the King in this
world. Please make me born as a fish in the pond in Thiruvenkadam, a pond near
the garden full of honey-laden flowers.”

“Hey, you have only 12 Azhwars; but we have 63 Nayanmars.”

“Is that a matter to be proud of? Take the case of Mahabharata. The good
Pandavas were only five in number. Whereas the evil Kauravas were a full
hundred. You know who won the righteous war.”

“You talk too much man. How dare you compare our Nayanmars to the

Duryodhana crowd? Remember in your Azhwars crowd there is one called
Peyazhwar, the ghost. And another Bhoothathazwhar, the ghoul.”

“Your Lord Shiva’s army consists of nothing but ghosts and ghouls. Have you
forgotten that?”

The Saiva and the Vaishnava fanatics continued their arguments. They were
cheered by people in the crowd who concurred with their views.

The place was quite noisy till Queen Mother Sembianmadevi and the Saivite
Saint Nambiyandar Nambi came out of the Ashram.

The Queen Mother took leave of the Saint and then turned her attention to
Azhwarkkadian.

“Thirumalai, should you have your fights here too?”

“No, Your Highness. It’s not a fight to prove muscle power, only the power of
words. I am not to be blamed. This man started the fight. Our wordy duel made
these people happy. They were engaged. For otherwise this entire crowd would
have come into the Ashram. “

“We should not argue whose God is greater even for fun. That would only
confuse the minds of ordinary people. You know my father-in-law Emperor
Paranthaka made a golden roof for the temple of the Dancing Lord at
Chidambaram. He renovated Lord Anantheeswara temple at

Veeranarayanapuram and bestowed many grants on that Vishnu temple. We
should all follow his example.”

Then the Queen Mother got into the palanquin. The bearers lifted it and started
to walk west. There were armed guards in the front as well as in the rear.
Azhwarkkadian walked very close to the palanquin.

After the palanquin moved a little away Azhwarkkadian opened a conversation
with the Queen Mother.

“Devi, you came to Nambiyandar Nambi to seek his views on a very specific
issue. Was he helpful?”

“He was. My mind is very clear now. If I cannot prevent Madhuranthakan from
ascending the Chozha throne the Saint advised me to tell the truth to the world. I
have accepted his advice.”

“The Chief Minister expected that kind of a reaction from Nambiyandar Nambi.
In a way it is good that you travelled here. There is another development which
will force you to decide on this issue immediately. We have got shocking news
from Kadambur. People do not know that yet. If they did, nobody will be here.
They will go to witness the funeral of our Prince.”

“Thirumalai, what do you say? What terrible words! Oh My God! Which
Prince? What funeral?”

“Please forgive me, Ma. This has not happened in the Chozha dynasty so far.
The Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan died at the Kadambur Palace. People say
that the death was unnatural. We do not know as yet who or what caused his
death. There are several versions, Ma. Soon after Karikalan’s death Kadambur
Palace has been burnt to ashes. That is the news we have now. The body of the
Prince is being carried to Thanjavur in a procession. Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman
has arrested Sambuvaraiyar and his family and is bringing them to the Capital.
They say that about a hundred thousand people are taking part in the procession.
Before they come to the banks of River Coleroon we should cross the river.”

“Thirumalai, it’s a calamity. A great tragedy. When the comet was seen people
expected a calamity in the Royal household. And it has happened. Oh My God!
Should the great warrior’s life end so soon? How can Sundara Chozhan bear this
bereavement? Will the Emperor be able to bear the shock? He is already ill. I am
worried that this shock should not make things worse for him. What if anything
happens to him? Lord Shiva, who is an ocean of love, should save the Chozha
clan.”

“Queen Mother, on the one side we have this great calamity to the Chozha clan.
But I have a fear that the Prince’s death will threaten the integrity of the Chozha
Empire.”

“I too have that fear, Thirumalai.”

“This might lead to a civil war amongst the Chieftains. When that happens when
we are busy fighting amongst ourselves shedding blood, external enemies might
invade us. Should I have to describe the consequences, Queen Mother?”

“Thirumalai, how do you say that the Prince’s death would lead to a war
between the chieftains and leaders?”

“You know better, Devi. Some will insist that your son Madhuranthakan should
come to power. Some will favour Prince Arulmozhivarman. Already the army
of Kodumbalur Chieftain has laid siege to Thanjavur Fort. Malaiyaman is now
going to Thanjavur with the body of the Prince. The chieftains on the side of
Pazhuvettaraiyars are gathering forces. Net result: in and around Thanjavur, the
Chozha soldiers will be fighting against each other. Instead of water blood will
flow in the five major rivers of the Empire, including Cauvery. Even our Chief
Minister, the unmatched genius, Aniruddha Brahmarayar is shaken. He feels
miserable that the great Chozha Empire established and expanded by
Vijayaalaya Chozhan, Adithya Chozhan, Paranthaka and your late lamented
husband, might be destroyed in our life time. He doesn’t know how to arrest the
fall.”

“Thirumalai, by the grace of my Lord I will save the Empire from that danger. I
know the way. I have a powerful weapon in my hand. I wanted to be sure
whether I can use that weapon now. I came to Nambiyandar Nambi only to clear
my doubts and harden my heart. Now let me be clear. There will be a civil war in
the country only when Madhuranthakan and Arulmozhivarman compete for the
Chozha throne. Am I right, Thirumalai?”

“You are right as always. But how can we prevent that? At least so long as
Adithya Karikalan was alive we had a reason that he is elder to Madhuranthakan.
Now that he is dead that reason is gone. Arulmozhivarman is younger to your
son. But Malaiyaman, Kodumbalur Chieftain and the majority of the people in
the Empire will prefer Arulmozhivarman to Madhuranthakan. But the
Pazhuvettaraiyars would not agree.”

“Irrespective of whether anybody agrees or not, Madhuranthakan will not
become the King. I will see to that. I will honour the wishes of my husband at
any cost. If Madhuranthakan is not in the race there will not be any civil war.
Am I right?”

“You are, Queen Mother. You are the only one who can save the Empire from
disaster. There is no other way, Ma.”

“I can’t do anything unless the kind Lord, who has my Holy Mother on his left,
gives me the strength for this formidable task.”

There was silence for a while. The boat jetty of River Coleroon was visible at a
distance.

“Thirumalai, you said Adithya Karikalan died. He is fit to rule all the three
worlds. The news of his death is shocking enough. But you also told that the
death was unnatural. How did it happen? Did he kill himself? Or was he
murdered?

“Devi, there are several versions of his death. Since it happened in
Sambuvaraiyar’s palace Malaiyaman considers him as the prime suspect.
Sambuvaraiyar and his family have been arrested and are being brought as
prisoners to Thanjavur. His son, Kandhanmaran, has escaped.”

“I don’t think Sambuvaraiyar would have done it. He may have enough reasons.
But who on earth would have the heart to kill the Emperor’s son when he is a
guest at their Palace? What does Sambuvaraiyar say about the Prince’s death?”

“Devi, once a warrior from the Vaana clan came to Pazhaiyaarai. Do you
remember him? Princess Kunthavai sent him to Srilanka with an important
message.”

“Yes. I remember. What about him?”

“He was the one who was by the side of the Prince’s lifeless body when it was
first seen by others. Sambuvaraiyar says that he should have killed the Prince.”

“Impossible, Thirumalai. I clearly remember the face of that young man. He
could not have done it.”

“My views are the same, Queen Mother. And yet the circumstances and evidence
are against Vandhiya Thevan.”

“Poor soul, Princess Kunthavai. She had placed enormous trust on that young
man. She will be shattered when she hears the news.”

“I wanted to know about that from you. As soon as you return to Kudanthai
please spend some time with Princess Kunthavai and then take her to Thanjavur
with you. It is good for her. Please.. “

“That is my plan as well. She is waiting for me there.”

“It is better she hears the news from your than from anybody else.”

“Then, are you not coming with me Thirumalai?”

“Queen Mother if you permit me I want to take leave of you at the southern bank
of River Coleroon.”

“Where are you going?”

“The death of Prince Karikalan is shrouded in mystery. I want to unravel it.”

“How?”

“Devi, I have told you about the Pandya conspirators. I saw one of them at the
banks of Coleroon on my way.”

“Why didn’t you follow him?”

“Only after reaching the northern bank of the River news of Karikalan’s death
reached me. Queen Mother, let me take leave of you. I know where the
conspirators will assemble tonight.”

“Take care. What shall I tell Princess Kunthavai? I am worried about her.”

“Ask her not to worry even if Vandhiya Thevan is accused of murder. Tell her
that I will find out the real culprit soon.”

“May God bless you. May your mission be successful.” The saintly Queen
Mother blessed him with all her heart.

They had reached the banks of River Coleroon. There were a number of boats
waiting for Sembianmadevi and her retinue.

Azhwarkkadian engaged a small boat and urged the boatman to row the boat
ahead of the Queen Mother’s convoy.

Chapter 44: At The Mountain Cave

Azhwarkkadian reached the southern banks of River Coleroon. He walked
westward. The whole area was flooded. The River had breached the banks at
several places and he saw water every where around him. But water was
receding fast. Not only in the river but also in the places where the banks had
been breached. Finally he reached Thiruppurambayam. Surprisingly the town,
though close to a river in spate, had not been affected by the floods.
Azhwarkkadian remembered an ancient legend. When the whole world was
sinking under apocalyptic floods Thiruppurambayam was the only town which
had not gone under water. There must be something special about this town,
mused Azhwarkkadian.

He reached the forest near the war memorial. Many of the large trees had fallen.
But then there was enough dense foliage to provide him cover. Azhwarkkadian
hid himself and looked at the memorial.

Three men and women were engaged in animated conversation at the gates of
the war memorial. Azhwarkkadian trained his eyes on their faces. They all
looked familiar. The three conspirators who originally assembled at the war
memorial were there – Soman Sambhavan, Kramavithan and Idumban Kari. The
only woman was Boatman Murugaiyyan’s wife Rakkammal.

Idumban Kari was talking to them. Azhwarkkadian could guess that the news
made them all happy.

Azhwarkkadian clearly heard the response from Idumban Kari.

“Then let’s also go to the base of Pachaimalai hills. The journey may take two
days.”

Azhwarkkadian wanted to leave the place before them. He was startled by a
small knife which appeared very close to his chest. He saw that the hand
wielding the knife belonged to Poonkuzhali. He relaxed. Azhwarkkadian smiled
at her. She reciprocated. They communicated through sign language.

When Azhwarkkadian was sure that the conspirators had left the place he spoke
to Poonkuzhali:

“Poonkuzhali, how did you come here from Thanjavur? And why?”

“I have come here to seek revenge.”

“Oh My God! Against whom? What for?”

“One of these men killed my aunt and ran away. I have been following him for
days and finally caught him here. Three people had come here before him. One
of the three was my sister-in-law Rakkammal. I was shocked. I never expected to
see her. Meanwhile you too came to interrupt me. What shall I do now? If you
promise to help me I will go behind them and kill the devil who killed my aunt.”

“Your aunt? That is Mute Queen, Mandhakini, right? Why should one of these
crooks kill her?”

“They did not come to kill my aunt. They sneaked into the Palace to kill the
Emperor They threw a spear aimed at the Emperor. My aunt went before the
Emperor and bore it on her chest. She died.”

“ Is that so? Do you mean to say that the Mute Queen gave her life to save that
of the Emperor? How did it happen? Please tell me the full story.”

“Is this the time for story-telling? We should not lose those traitors.”

“Poonkuzhali, I know where they are going. I also know who they are going to
meet there. It is wise not to interrupt their journey. Let us go to that place. When
I know what I want to know, you can fulfil your revenge.”

“Let’s leave now. I will tell you what happened in Thanjavur.”

They crossed the river on a boat and started walking north west. After travelling
for three days and three nights they reached the base of Pachaimalai Hills. The
foothill was covered with dense forest. They could not find the traitors there.
They were disappointed.

They were jolted by the sound of an owl hooting. There was another sound in
response to the first. Azhwarkkadian’s face blossomed into a big smile. He
signalled to Poonkuzhali to follow him. He walked to the source of the sound.
They reached a clearing in the forest. There were about eight people there. Some
of them were cooking on a make-shift oven. Others were engaged in animated
conversation.

Azhwarkkadian guessed that those who were already there were trying to share a
matter of great surprise with those who reached the spot later.

Ravidasan had been in the spot already. He pointed out a mountain cave in the
yonder to those who reached the spot recently and was talking to them.
Azhwarkkadian noticed that.

“Poonkuzhali, the persons we are looking for should be in that cave. Let me go
into the cave to find out. If these crooks come near the cave give me a signal.”

“I can’t hoot like an owl. I will sing like a cuckoo.”

Large holes had been drilled into the outer wall of the cave to provide air and
light. The cave had enough light. Azhwarkkadian saw a rare sight there. Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar was dressed in tiger’s skin like a Kalamuka. A garland made of
human skulls was lying by his side. Pazhuvettaraiyar must have lost quite a lot
of blood. He looked very pale and anaemic.

He was lying on the floor. He should have come back to his senses just now. He
tried to sit up. He appeared as if he woke up from a violent dream. His eyes
darted in all the directions. He looked lost.

Nandini was by his side. She did not have any jewels on her body. Her hair was
let loose. And yet her matchless beauty shone brighter than before.

She spoke to her husband in a voice full of compassion.

“Please have this gruel.”

She gave a mud vessel to her husband.

Pazhuvettaraiyar turned to look at her. For a second his face shone in boundless
happiness. The happiness overflowed in the form of a smile.

“Nandini, my dear Empress! Is that you who talked now? Is that your voice?
Where are we, dear? Was it you who brought me back from the gates of death?
Did you do to me what the legendary Savithri did to her husband Sathyavan?
When I regained my consciousness I felt as if your hand, which is softer than a
flower, was feeling my chest. Is it true, dear? You have not touched me for the
last three years. Have you changed your mind now? Come on, give me that
gruel. Even if you give me poison with your sweet hand it will be like the elixir
of life for me. Come on give it to me.”

He got the mud vessel from her. Suddenly he focussed his eyes on her. Nandini
could not bear that stare. His voice had changed completely.

“Evil Woman! Demon! Heartless Devil! Is that you? How dare you touch me?
You try to stab me on my chest. I woke up at the right time. What is there in this
vessel? Is it gruel? Or poison? Even if your hand were to give me the elixir of
life for me it will be nothing but poison.”

He threw the vessel away. It hit the wall of the cave and was shattered to
smithereens.

Chapter 45: It’s Time To Take Leave!

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s outburst did not affect Nandini. She had been treating
her husband like a puppet. By moving the ropes of control firmly held in her deft
hands she made him dance to her tunes all these three years. But now the string
that connected her hand to the puppet was cut. The puppet had come back to a
life of its own and had started using its brains. Nandini was sort of expecting this
to happen. This puppet would not be useful to her any longer.

Nandini was exceedingly calm. She came before Pazhuvettaraiyar and folded her
hands towards him.

She spoke in a choked voice:

“Many times you have told me that my words were as sweet as the elixir of life.
But today like the gruel I gave you, my words too are perhaps as bitter as a
killer-venom. But before I take leave of you for the last time please allow me to
speak a few words. You used to call me as ‘dear’ and ‘sweet darling’; the same
mouth called me as a demon and an evil woman today. Yes, I am a demon. Yes, I
am an evil woman. I have been deceiving you for the last three years. I was an
orphan loitering in the forest. You took me to your palace. You made the queens
and princesses in your palace respect me. They became jealous of me. You
were ready to fight for me with your own brother, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. The
people of the country cursed you, ridiculed you and humiliated you. Even that
could not change your love for me. I betrayed your love. You trusted me; you
loved me; you gave me life and honour and yet I betrayed you. I lived in your
palace only to fulfil my evil mission. I did many things without your knowledge.
I had links with the conspirators. I unleashed my charm on young men like
Parthibendran and Kandhanmaran and used them for my selfish motives. But I
can swear in the name of any force I know – I was never unfaithful to you. I

have never thought of anybody else as my husband. You can be assured that the
honour and glory of your ancient clan – the clan which had given so many
warriors to the Chozha Empire – was never stained by immorality. So long as I
shall live I shall be true and faithful only to you. I won’t think of anybody else as
my husband.”

“What nonsense are you talking, Nandini? What greater humiliation can our clan
have than this? Oh My God! With my own hands... with my own hands.... You
Devil! Didn’t you have a sword? Where the hell is that? You sever my hands
with that sword. That’s the greatest help you can do for me right now. No, no.
Don’t do that. The hands have an important work. A very important work. Don’t
take my words literally and try to cut my hands.”

“No, I will never do that, my Lord. I could not use the sword even on the person
against whom I wanted to take revenge. I thought I’d miss that opportunity also.
But you came to help me at the last moment.”

“Heartless Demon! Sorceress! Did I come to help you? What the hell are you
saying? Evil Woman! A ghost in the form of a woman! If only I had known this
would happen I would not have come there. Oh My God! If only the Lord of
Death taken my life when I was struggling in River Coleroon, it would have
been much better. I would have been spared of this treachery, dishonour and
humiliation.”

“My Lord, you did not come to help me. Nor did I seek your help. You have
sworn to be loyal to the Chozha King. You have sworn to be faithful to the clan
and even sacrifice your life to save the honour and glory of Chozha Empire. But
I came to wreak vengeance on the Chozha Dynasty. That was why I never
revealed my real intentions. At times I even thought whether it is fair to use you
for my mission. Please think, my Lord. Today you call me a demon and a ghost
in the form of a woman. But once upon a time you lost your mind in the beauty
of my face. You have stood before me transfixed in my beauty. At those times I

even thought of using you as a weapon against my enemy. But I did not want
you to betray your trust. I didn’t want you to swerve from your duty. That was
the only reason I tried hard to move you away from Kadambur. You also went to
Thanjavur. But Destiny brought you back at the crucial time. Yes, it was Destiny
which made you doubt my fidelity. If your only motive had been to prevent me
from the vengeful act you would have come right royally through the gates of
the Fort. You wanted to make sure whether I was faithful to you or not. That
made you choose the secret passage and the clandestine entry. That made you
take the guise of a Kalamuka. I am sure your doubts are cleared now. If you still
doubt me, well, this is the last chance to clear them. Our elders say that a
husband and a wife are companions. It was because I was faithful to you that
Destiny made you come at the right time to help me.”

"STOP THAT NONSENSE NANDINI! YOUR WORDS TORTURE ME!
INSTEAD YOU CAN KILL ME. MY HANDS DON’T HAVE THE
STRENGTH TO DEFEND MYSELF. Nor is there any strength left in my mind
or body. If you don’t have the mind to kill me with the sword, you add poison to
this gruel and give it to me. Let me die.”

“Please forgive me, my Lord. But I know you cannot forgive me. At least not in
this birth. Please listen to me, my Lord. When we both are born again in this
world, we won’t remember whatever happened during this life time. You will
never remember me leading a life of deception in your palace; you won’t
remember my using the Chozha gold for my mission of seeking revenge. You
won’t even remember that what happened at the Kadambur Palace because of
the power of Destiny. I won’t remember them either. I want to atone for my sins.
I want to compensate you at least in my next birth for what I have done to you
during this one. I will marry you in my next birth. I will be a true and faithful
wife to you all my life. From now on so long as I shall live that shall be my only
prayer.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar melted.

“Please go away, Nandini. At once. If you stay any longer I might lose my mind.
I might fail in my duty. The miseries you caused to me are more than enough for
one life time. Go away.
RIGHT NOW.”

“Please forgive me, My Lord. If I had listened to the words of those who are
with me by this time we would have crossed this Pachaimalai Hills and Kolli
Hills and would have entered the Kongu country. But I did not have the heart to
go without taking proper leave of you; without confessing my sins to you. As
soon as you came out of the Kadambur Fort you fainted. My men advised me to
abandon you. But I was not for it. I made them carry you. We have been walking
day and night for the past three days. They told me that we can leave you here.
But I insisted that I will wait till you become conscious and then come with them
only after taking leave of you. I had my way. You tried to kill me. You have the
full justification to do so. But Destiny willed otherwise. You wanted to kill me; I
saved you from near death. You threw away the gruel I gave you. You shunned it
as if it were poison. During the last three days I have been feeding water into
your mouth and have kept you alive.

During the three years I lived in your palace you treated me like a Queen. I can
never repay the gratitude during this life time. But I am fortunate enough to be
able to serve you during the last three days. This thought will give me solace till
I die. Please let me go. I take leave of you.”

“Go away, Nandini. You need not have to take leave of me. The longer you delay
greater is the risk of my losing my mind.”

“Yes, my Lord. You may decide to kill me. My Lord, if you kill me I will
consider it as my greatest privilege. You came in this disguise only to kill me at
Kadambur, right?”

“You explained the reason for my disguise. You told me that I suspected your
fidelity and came there to find out the truth. No, it is not right. I was afraid that if
I had come as Pazhuvettaraiyar and if you speak a few nice words to me I might
melt. That was the reason for that terrible guise. I did not want to give room to
you to talk. I wanted to throw the knife on you before you could even open your
mouth. I threatened Idumban Kari, a member of the Palace Staff at Kadambur
and extracted the knife from him. Not only that, Nandini. I didn’t want the
people to ridicule me saying that the old man Pazhuvettaraiyar murdered his
young wife out of jealousy. Hence I came in the guise of Kalamuka. But as you
told just now Destiny willed otherwise. I can never attempt to kill you again. Go
away. But tell me this before you go. If I had not come at that time how you
would have accomplished your mission?”

"I was about to say that, my Lord. Your fury has made me lose my mind. When
you left Kadambur to go to Thanjavur I gave a promise that I won’t do anything
that will spoil the honour of your ancient clan. I tried my best to keep up my
word. I devised a strategy to use Kandhanmaran, Vandhiya Thevan or
Manimekalai for my work. I trusted Manimekalai more than the other two. I
calculated that Karikalan would run to that place to kill Vandhiya Thevan for an
entirely different reason. But Manimekalai was hiding in that place. I was sure
Manimekalai would kill Karikalan just to defend herself. And Vandhiya Thevan
would put the blame on himself to save Manimekalai. That way I thought I can
settle a score with Kunthavai. That was my plan. But there was no need for all
that. The Prince killed himself.”

“No, Nandini. Karikalan did not kill himself. Don’t try to fool me.”

“My Lord, if you had not thrown Idumban Kari’s knife the next moment
Karikalan would have killed himself with the sword of Veerapandiyan.”

“If only I had come a little late I would not have had any part in the greatest act
of betrayal. Instead I would have suspected you. Destiny had its way as always.

Nobody can change the course of Destiny. In a way Destiny has helped me. If at
all there is a next birth for us you said that you would like to be my wife. I have
never heard anything sweeter all my life. Not even from you. When I die I shall
remember those words. Yes, Nandini. We cannot unite in this life. Go away.
Before you go, please give me some gruel, if anything is left over. Or at least
some water with your own hand. I am famished.”

“I will do that, my Lord. For the love you showed me I will be indebted to you
for life.”

Nandini went to the oven to take gruel.

Azhwarkkadian decided to silently slip away from the cave. Whatever he wanted
to know he knew. It would be dangerous to stay there any longer.

He had to now think about the next course of action. He walked out of the cave.

Chapter 46: Azhwarkkadian In Danger!

Azhwarkkadian and Poonkuzhali were sitting under a tree at the foot of the hill.

“Can we leave the place now? My work is finished.”

“What about my work, Vaishnavite?”

“What is your work?”

“I came in search of the villain who killed my aunt.”

“Haven’t you found him yet? Is he not there in that crowd?”

“He is.”

“Then what?”

“Did I come here to have a dharshan of him so that good karma will accrue to
me? I came here to kill him. To avenge my aunt’s death.”

“Who are we to punish the wrongdoers? It’s the work of Almighty God.”

“Is there a God? Even assuming there is one does he ever punish the traitors?”

“Ok, let’s leave God out of our discussion. Kings have the responsibility of
punishing the criminals. The punishment has to be carried out by the officers
appointed by the King.”

“If the King and his officers fail in their duty... “

“How can we decide?”

“Vaishnavite, one of the crooks over there threw a spear from the terrace and
killed my aunt, who is nothing but love. She is dumb. She has never harmed
anybody in her life. She has been unlucky right from her birth. And that crook
has killed such a noble, innocent lady. The King, his queens and the commander
of the Fort, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar were mere spectators. They let him run
away.”

“Didn’t they take any effort to capture Soman Sambhavan?”

“The Emperor who had been indifferent to his first wife, I mean my aunt, made
her lie on his lap and cried. Others were watching the sight in a state of shock. I
told them that I was going to follow the killer. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar came with
me. But he had to return through the underground passage.”

“Why?”

“When we went through the underground passage a moan was heard in the dark.
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar ran towards the direction of the sound and caught hold
of a person standing there. ‘Here, I have caught the killer.’ He shouted. ‘No, no. I
did not kill,’ replied the voice. When Junior recognised the owner of the voice he
was in for a great shock. ‘Why did you come here?’ – the Junior asked the other
man.

‘I came here to check whether the Treasury was safe.’

‘Oh My God! Is this the time for checking? If somebody sees you here they will
think that you attempted to kill the Emperor.’

‘Is the Emperor dead already?’

I then recognised that it was his son-in-law Prince Madhuranthakan.

‘Don’t be a fool. Come with me. Let’s get out of here before anybody sees us.’
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar grabbed his son-in-law’s hand and took him back to the
Palace.

Then I followed the killer from the Palace up to here. Having come so far,
having taken so much trouble do you want me go back without doing anything?”

“Hey girl, you should have been born a man. If you had, you would have been a
dictator of a vast country. Ok, let it wait. Suppose a person wants to kill
somebody. Instead he kills somebody else by sheer accident. Can you charge
him with murder?”

“I don’t understand your question. A person who has killed has to be guilty of
murder.”

“How do you say that? You might have heard this story in Ramayana. Emperor
Dasaratha judged from the sound he heard that an elephant was drinking water.
He shot his arrow towards the source of the sound. There was no elephant there.
The arrow hit the son of a Rishi. Was he punished for the offence of murder? No.
Take the case of Soman Sambhavan whom you were following till now. He
threw the spear to kill the Emperor. But the Emperor is alive. Your aunt ran in
between, bore the spear on her and died. In a way she killed herself. How can
you blame Soman Sambhavan?”

“Your sense of fairness and justice is weird.”

“Not just my sense of justice, but also that of my Lord, the Omnipotent and
Omnipresent Narayana, is also strange. The sinners live happily. Good people,
those who have earned a lot of merit, they suffer and die. God should have some
system of justice which results in this apparent anomaly.”

“You and your Narayana live with your own peculiar justice system. In my
system he has committed a crime. In my system he has to be punished. I will
punish him. Wait for me.”

“Poonkuzhali, I did not say that to pacify you. There in the mountain cave there
are two people. One of them killed Adithya Karikalan. But he never wanted to
kill the Crown Prince. He had planned to kill somebody else. The knife he aimed
at somebody landed on Karikalan and he died. Can we call him a murderer?”

“Don’t try to confuse me? Who are all there in that cave?”

“The Honourable Chancellor of Exchequer of the Chozha Kingdom, the
uncrowned dictator of the Thanjavur Palace, the great warrior who had been in
twenty four wars sustaining sixty four wounds of valour on his body, the one
who has the exclusive power of levying taxes on the Chozha subjects, the head
of the federation of Chieftains, the husband of the great Nandini Devi is there in
that cave.”

Azhwarkkadian spoke in so loud a voice as if he were heralding the arrival of the
dignitary. Ravidasan, Revadasan, Parameswaran, Soman Sambhavan and others
came running to that place. Poonkuzhali moved away from the Vaishnavite.
Ravidasan was armed with a small, thick stick.

“Hey Vaishnava! Hypocrite! The Spy of Aniruddha Brahmarayar! Caught at last!
Out of the three big tasks we planned we succeeded in one and failed in the other
two. We are not bothered about our defeats. We have been looking for you for
the past three years. At last we have caught you. This time all your ways of
escape are sealed.”

Azhwarkkadian spoke in a deliberately loud voice “Hey, who is trying to escape
from whom? All of us are the children of Lord Narayana. Without his assent not
even an atom will change its place. Listen, Ravidasa. Let your men also listen.

Abandon all the minor deities and take refuge in Lord Vishnu. He will forgive all
your sins and give you salvation. Don’t waste your lives working for these
ungrateful men. Worship Narayana and enjoy the fruit of being born as human
beings. Come let’s all sing together:

‘Lord Narayana is our only God! Come let us all worship him.’

Azhwarkkadian started to sing in a loud voice.

Ravidasan laughed.

“Hey Vaishnavite if Lord Narayana is the only God who is Lord Shiva? Is he not
a God? Do you mean to say that if we worship Shiva we won’t get salvation?”

“Lord Shiva is in charge of destruction. Lord Narayana is in charge of
protection. He alone is our saviour. Have you forgotten the fact that my Lord
saved the elephant whose leg was caught in the mouth of a crocodile?”

“Your Lord saved the elephant but killed the crocodile. He killed Ravana,
Kumbakarna, Hiranyaksha, Hiranya Kasipu, Sisubala, Dhandavakra and many
others.”

“Even those who are killed by my Lord reach the highest of heavens. After
killing Hiranya, Ravana and Sisubala he gave them the highest position in
heaven. In His abode. But your Lord Shiva totally annihilated the demons in
Tripura. Did he give them salvation? To my knowledge, not.”

“Stop telling stories. Let your Lord Narayana save you now.”

Ravidasan lifted the stick high. Poonkuzhali took out the knife from her waist.
At the same time a lady with her hair let loose came running from the mountain
cave. At first Poonkuzhali thought it was her aunt. She was shocked. But then
she realised that it was Nandini.

Nandini came near Azhwarkkadian. She blocked Ravidasan’s action. She held
the other end of the stick firmly in her hand.

“No. Please don’t harm my brother. Ravidasa, if you really consider me as your
queen put the stick down. Now.”

Azhwarkkadian spoke with a nonchalant smile.

“Thanks for your timely help, my dear sister. But these people could not have
harmed me. My Lord Narayana would have saved me. I am very sure.”

Ravidasan laughed.

“How could he have saved you? Do you expect him to come out of this tree like
he came out of a pillar long ago to save his devotee Prahalada?”

“You don’t believe me, Sorcerer? Good. Look there. Look at the Ayyanar
Temple over there. Aren’t there a lot of mud horses before the temple? Thanks to
my Lord Narayana’s grace they will all come to life. Soldiers armed with spears
will mount on those horses, arrest you and release me.”

Everybody looked in that direction. Nobody could believe his eyes. The mud
horses had really sprung to life and were running fast towards them. On every
horse was a soldier armed with a shining spear.

Chapter 47: Nandini’s Disappearance

Everyone froze on seeing the horses. Ravidasan was the first to come back to his
senses.

“Devi, this fake Vaishnavite has shown his true colours. I have told you a
thousand times that this man is a spy, don’t ever trust him. He has brought his
men to capture us. But take it from me, Devi. He or his men can never come near
us. Why even if his god, Lord Narayana comes her we can’t be caught. Come
let’s go. Before the horses come here let’s go up the hills.”

Azhwarkkadian pleaded to Nandini.

“Don’t go with these crooks. You joined them and left a trail of destruction on
your way. It’s time to stop all that now. Please... “

Nandini replied in a soft yet firm voice: “Thirumalai I have been asking you
something for a long, long time. Do you remember that? I asked you to take me
to my mother. At least now grant me that favour. I will come with you. Or else I
will go with these people.”

Azhwarkkadian wanted to say, “Nandini, that is impossible now.”

But before he could utter those words Ravidasan intervened: “Who is he to take
you to your mother? Let me do it for you, Devi. Please come with me.”

“Yes, he will surely take you to your mother. To the world of death. He will kill
you in the same way he killed your mother and send you to the abode of Death
Lord. Nandini, shun the company of these crooks. One of these men killed your
mother. See the Sorcerer’s face. The word “MURDERER” is written in large
letters across his face. “

Ravidasan was furious. “No Devi. It’s a lie. He’s lying.”

Nandini, who till then was calm suddenly acted as if she were possessed.

“Is it true, Thirumalai? Is my mother dead? Can I not see her again in my life?”

“Nandini, if you don’t believe me ask this girl. One of these men, Soman
Sambhavan, threw a spear at your mother and killed her. This girl Poonkuzhali is
an eye-witness. He followed the group from Thanjavur. Tell her Poonkuzhali.”

“Yes, I saw with my own eyes. I came here only to take revenge for my aunt’s
death”

“Revenge! Revenge! Did you see how I sought revenge and made a mess of my
life?”

She then turned to Ravidasan.

“Traitor! Man of Evil! Did you do that?”

“Queen you got it all wrong. Nobody is a betrayer here. Soman Sambhavan
aimed the spear at the Emperor. That mute nut came in between, got the spear on
her body and died. That is her destiny. Tell me what you are going to do. Are
you coming with us or not? The horses have come near.”

Nandini did not hear his words. She sat down. She closed her eyes with her
hands. She broke into a violent sob which shook her body. Her sobs were
punctuated by frenzied laugh.

Ravidasan barked to his men: “Run!.Run for your lives. Climb the hill. There is
no point in trusting the Queen!.”

They all started to run. Ravidasan looked menacingly at Azhwarkkadian.

“Vaishnava, here’s the reward for your mischief!.”

He hit him hard with the stick in his hand and ran up the hill.

Azhwarkkadian shouted “Namo Narayana!” He felt his head with his hand.

They all ran into the cave. A few minutes later they appeared on the top of the
hill at the place where River Kanari turned into a waterfall.

At the same time the horses reached the foot of the hill. There was no proper
road. Large stones were scattered all around. It took a while for the horses to
reach the place.

Azhwarkkadian saw that Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and Kandhanmaran led the
team. Behind them was Chendan Amudhan bound to a horse.

“Come, come. You could not have come at a better time.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and Kandhanmaran jumped from their horses. Their
attention was drawn to Nandini who was sitting and sobbing. Kandhanmaran
went near Nandini. He wanted to say something. But words failed to come out of
his mouth.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar spoke to Azhwarkkadian:

“Vaishnavite, how did you come here? And what for?”

“Commander, I came here for the same person you have come for. Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar is there in that cave.”

“Really? Is he alive?”

“Yes. He is still alive. Even the Lord of Death will be afraid to approach your
valiant brother. That explains why all the attempts made by the assassins to kill
him failed.”

Azhwarkkadian pointed out to Ravidasan and others standing on the top of the
hill.

“Who are they? Why do you call them assassins?”

“Sorcerer Ravidasan and his gang. Former bodyguards of the slain king
Veerapandiyan. They tried to kill the Emperor. They killed the Crown Prince.”

Kandhanmaran intervened.

“It’s a lie. A damned lie. I know who killed the Crown Prince. It is Vandhiya
Thevan. Are you trying to shield your friend?”

“Shut up, you fool.” Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar roared to Kandhanmaran. He spoke
to Azhwarkkadian.

“Did they try to kill the Chancellor as well? How did he escape from them?”

“Look at the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. She is sobbing. It’s because of her help
that the Chancellor is alive today.”

“Why is the Junior Queen crying?”

“She just heard that her mother died. She is crying. Is this the time to conduct a
detailed enquiry?”

“You are right. I want to see Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Tell him that I have come
to see him.”

Junior’s regard for his elder brother had not diminished even slightly. He did not
want to barge in on his elder brother.

“Commander, your brother will not go away anywhere. I will tell him that you
have come. Aren’t you going to do anything to capture those killers?”

The Commander pressed his forehead with his hand.

“You are right. On an earlier occasion I lost my head and let the person who
attempted on the life of the Emperor escape from the Palace.”

“He is also there on the top of the hill. Send your men.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar barked orders to his men. They got down from the
horses and climbed up the hill. As soon as they went near the place where the

River Kanari turned into a waterfall, large, round rocks started falling down from
the top. The soldiers moved this way and that way to avoid being hit by the
rocks. One or two men were hit and they fell down.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was worried. He spoke to Azhwarkkadian.

“Do you know how did they go up the hill?”

“They went into the cave and from there got up. There should be a secret
passage through the cave. Come, let’s go.”

Azhwarkkadian went first. Kandhanmaran and the Commander followed him.

A tall, majestic figure staggered out of the cave. It looked pointedly at those who
were coming towards the cave. It took some time for the Junior to recognise his
illustrious brother.

The Senior’s body was covered with wounds. He was pale. There was deathly
glow in her usually majestic face. As soon as the Junior recognised him he ran
into his arms. “Anna” he sobbed.

Tears were streaming out of the eyes of the Senior. His voice was unusually soft:

“Thambi, you warned me several times. I ignored them all. And I have lost
everything.”

Azhwarkkadian and Kandhanmaran tried to enter the cave.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar stopped them.

“Where are you going?”

“We saw the killers entering this cave. We are going after them.”

“Which killers?”

“Ravidasan and his men.”

“They are not the killers.” Pazhuvettaraiyar almost shouted.

“Didn’t I say that Vandhiya Thevan is the murderer?” – Kandhanmaran.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar looked sharply at him. “How did this foolish young man
come here?”

“Kandhanmaran brought the news from Kadambur.”- Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“What news?”

“Prince Karikalan is dead. Sambuvaraiyar has sent news through him that we
should gather all our forces and make Madhuranthakan the next king.”

“Oh, is that so?” The Senior was listless.

“How is Thanjavur now?” – Senior to Junior.

“I have to explain so many things, Anna. You look very weak. Why don’t we sit
here and talk?” – Junior to Senior

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar sat at the entrance of the cave blocking the way.

“Chancellor, if you move a little aside and give us way we will explore if there is
any way to go to the top from here.”

“Ravidasan and his men went to the top only from here.”

“No use. As soon as they got out of the cave they moved large rocks and have
blocked the way. It was really a miracle that I was not hit by those rocks. Go
away. Find out if there is any other way to go to the top of the hill.”

As soon as Azhwarkkadian and Kandhanmaran moved away the Senior’s eyes
fell on Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali.

“Who are they? Why did they come here?”

“That girl is the daughter of Thiyaga Vidangar, the caretaker of our lighthouse at
Kodikkarai. She has come here looking out for the man who killed his aunt.
Chendan Amudhan came looking out for her. He showed the way to us. It was
because of him we found you.”

“Tell me what happened in Thanjavur.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar started a long narration.

He told about the person from the gang who was hiding in the underground
treasury. He had come to murder the Emperor. He threw the spear on the
Emperor. Mandhakini Devi came in between, got the spear on her body, and
gave her life to save that of the Emperor.

“Anna, in the meanwhile the Kodumbalur Chieftain has laid siege to the
Thanjavur Fort with a large army. In your absence I could not decide whether I
should start a war with him or not. I could not ask the Emperor as he was not
well. I consulted the Chief Minister who fortunately was inside the Fort. He
advised me to wait till you come. He said that it was enough if I keep the Fort
safe till your return. At that time Prince Arulmozhivarman and Kodumbalur
Princess Vanathi entered the Fort. The Prince came in the guise of a mahout.

Vanathi told me that she was bearing an urgent message from Princess
Kunthavai. I thought it was better to have the Kodumbalur Princess inside the
Fort and let her elephant in. At the gates of the Palace I came to know that the
mahout was Prince Arulmozhivarman. I was shocked. I should give it to him,
Anna. Our Prince Arulmozhivarman has rare magical powers. When I saw him
my limbs started trembling. And my heart melted for him. Without my knowing
my hands folded in reverence towards the Prince. I bowed to him and welcomed
him. I had no other option. It is no surprise that our people adore him, worship
him and are ready to lay down their lives for him.”

“Stop. I know all that. I thought that Arulmozhivarman being drowned in the sea
was a hoax. I was right. Tell me what happened next. Why should the Prince
come in the guise of a mahout?”

“Otherwise the Kodumbalur Chieftain would have blocked him. He would not
let him go inside the Fort. His army would revolt. To avoid these complications
the Prince came in disguise. He is smart, Anna. He deserves praise for what he
did. When Prince Arulmozhivarman was talking to his father the killer threw the
spear from the terrace. That fell on that mad, dumb woman and she died. If the
spear had landed on the Emperor and had taken his life that would have been the
greatest disgrace to our clan.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar spoke almost to himself.

‘The disgrace has come already. It’s ineffaceable.’

“Pardon me, Anna.”

“No, no. Nothing. Continue.”

“Then a miracle happened. Our Emperor who could not walk or move for a long
time sprang from his bed, held the dumb lady on his lap and started crying. We
were all shocked. Honestly too many things happened in too short a time. This
boat-girl Poonkuzhali ran after the killers. I followed her. It is only because of
her I found you here. She should be blessed with every kind of happiness in life.
But for her I would not have seen you here, Anna.”

Senior was crying.

“Thambi, I have heard about devoted brothers in myths and legends. But I
challenge no one had a brother as devoted as you. Tell me what happened
afterwards.”

“I followed Poonkuzhali in the underground passage. I caught hold of a man
there. I first thought he was the murderer. When I heard his voice I was sure it
was Madhuranthakan.”

“Why the hell did he come through the underground passage?”

“I don’t know. His replies are evasive. I am afraid that somebody might think of
him as the murderer.”

“Who knows, he could be the murderer.”

“No, Anna. He is naive. He is a coward. He won’t go to that extent. I saw the
person who threw the spear. Madhuranthakan almost refused to come out of the
underground passage. I had to convince him to go back. I took him back to the
palace, placed him under guard and then I had planned to continue my pursuit of
the killers. Meanwhile so many things happened, Anna. Rumours spread outside
the Fort that the Emperor was killed. Kodumbalur Chieftain ordered his army to
break open the gates of the Fort. The Kaikkola Regiment also joined forces with
the Chieftain’s army. Our soldiers were not prepared. I was not there to give
orders. The invaders broke open the gates of the Fort and have entered in. Some
also scaled the walls of the Fort and came in.

Before I could go to the entrance to plan counter-action tens of thousand of
soldiers had come in. We had only two thousand soldiers. They fought bravely
with the invaders. I went there and stopped the battle. I gathered all our soldiers
in one place. I decided that there is no point in staying in the Fort any longer. I
left the Fort with our soldiers. On the way we were blocked by the soldiers of
Kodumbalur Chieftain and the Kaikkola Regiment. We killed everybody who
stood in our way and have reached here. I also sent a message to Bhoothi
Vikrama Kesari “If anybody in the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s family or Madhuranthakan
is slightly hurt we will annihilate the entire Kodumbalur clan.”

I thought you would be in Kadambur and went there. On the way I saw
Kandhanmaran riding fast on his horse near River Kudamurutti. He saw our
Palm Tree flag and stopped there. The news he brought to me shocked me even
more. He told me that you had left Kadambur a few days ago, and that
Sambuvaraiyar has got an urgent message for you. When I told him that you did
not reach Thanjavur he was shocked. I asked about the urgent message
Sambuvaraiyar had sent for you. The message was cryptic: Adithya Karikalan is
dead. Vandhiya Thevan killed him. And this is the right time to crown
Madhuranthakan. He wants you to start working on that. He has requested you to
send message to all the friendly chieftains and gather a large army for the
project. I also agree with Sambuvaraiyar. I thought you are already on the job
and you will come back soon. I have kept our Pazhuvur Army at a place between
River Manni and River Coleroon at the high ground of Thiruppurambayam. I
have sent horsemen to Mazhavaraiyar, Mazhapadi Thennavan, Kunrathur

Kizhar, Mummudi Pallavarayar, Thanathongi Kalingarayar, Vanangamudi
Munaiyadaraiyar, Devasenapathy Poovaraiyar, Mutharaiyar, and the TwinParasol Rajaliyar with a message to come with a huge army to
Thiruppurambayam. You don’t have to worry, Anna. Let us destroy the
Kodumbalur Chieftain and Malaiyaman. Let us make Madhuranthakan our
King.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was excited.

His words did not stir his elder brother. His attention was elsewhere.

“Thambi, who is that lady, the one who is crying over there?”

“Can’t you recognise her? It’s the Junior Queen. Poor soul. She has suffered a lot
to save you. Please forget whatever I told about her. I learnt that you were
captured by Ravidasan and his men. And it was the Junior Queen who followed
you till the end and rescued you from them. Is that true?”

“Yes, it is. She is the one who saved me. But for her yeoman service you could
not have seen me alive. The world would not have known the truth.”

“Even I could not understand her greatness. How can the world understand her
noble intentions, Anna?”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar ignored him.

“Has Nandini not yet gone? I thought she would have joined others through the
stairs from the cave.”

“How can she go away from you, Anna?”

“We will come to that later. How did you find this place?”

“We stayed near the War Memorial at Thiruppurambayam. Kandhanmaran was
on the banks of River Coleroon guarding our army post. He saw Chendan
Amudhan boarding a boat. He captured him. He brought him to me. You might
remember I jailed him for a few days for helping Vandhiya Thevan to escape
from our custody. Kandhanmaran too was furious over him. Chendan Amudhan
told us that his cousin went in pursuit of some killers and he went to help her. It
seems Poonkuzhali sent him back. But he nevertheless followed her without her
knowledge. At that time he saw some conspirators assembled at
Thiruppurambayam and discussing their plans. It was only then he knew that
you were held hostage by that crowd and that you had been taken to Pachaimalai
Hills. He knew that Poonkuzhali and Azhwarkkadian were going to the same
place. He tried to trail them. Kandhanmaran and I gathered fifty soldiers and left
for this place. Chendan Amudhan insisted on coming with us. I thought in a way
it was good. We bound him to a horse and brought him here. Now that I have
found you I don’t have to worry about anything. Let us leave this place. At once.
I will make our men to carry you gently without hurting you. By this time a large
army would have gathered at Thiruppurambayam. We can capture the Thanjavur
Fort in a matter of hours.”

“Yes, we have to go to Thanjavur.” Senior said with a long sigh. He stood up.
He walked towards Nandini.

Nandini had been sitting on a rock and crying till then. When she heard the

majestic sound of Pazhuvettaraiyar clearing his throat she was startled. She stood
up. She looked around with her frenzied eyes. Azhwarkkadian was standing very
close to her.

“Nandini! Give me your consent, at least now. Tell me that you will come with
me. Just a word, even a nod is enough. Let us go north to places like Vrindavan,
Mathura, Ayodhya, Varanasi, Haridwar and Rishikesh. We shall chant the name
of my Lord and sing the compositions of Azhwars. Let us spend the rest of lives
happily. I will leave my Government job and am ready to come with you.”

Nandini saw him through a screen of tears.

“Thirumalai I let you down. I betrayed you. But your love for me has not
changed. Your Lord Narayana will bestow His grace on you forever and ever.”

Poonkuzhali was telling Chendan Amudhan: “Did you see the Pazhuvur Queen
over there? Doesn’t she resemble my aunt?”

“Yes. Since she has let her hair loose she exactly resembles your aunt.”

“From now on she will be my aunt. Whatever love I had for my aunt I will
shower in on the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur.”

“I am with you in this, Poonkuzhali.” Amudhan said very softly.

Meanwhile Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar had come near Nandini.

Nandini prostrated before her husband. She touched his feet and reverentially
placed the hand on her eyes. As soon as she got up she saw her husband. She
turned swiftly. Her eyes fell on the horses brought by the Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men. She ran towards the horses like a mad woman. She
sprang on a horse. She held the reins and shook the horse. The horse leapt from
its place and started to gallop very fast.

Others did not know what was in Nandini’s mind till then. Once they knew her
intentions they tried to stop her. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, Azhwarkkadian,
Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali took a step forward.

“STOP” Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar roared. Everybody froze. They were all looking
at the Senior.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was looking at Nandini’s form which was receding fast
from his vision. The horse ran as fast as the wind and soon it took a turn at the
foot of the hills and vanished.

Along with the horse the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur, the matchless beauty, the
great seductress, the woman who was understood little and loved even less, the
one and only Nandini Devi, vanished from the lives of all the characters in this
story.

Chapter 48: “You Are Not My Son”

Adithya Karikalan’s body was taken in a procession to Thanjavur along the
banks of River Cauvery. Millions of people from the Chozha Kingdom took part
in that procession. In those days warriors were worshipped by people. The
Chozha clan had its dark period in history a few decades earlier. With the advent
of Vijayaalaya Chozhan the clan was restored to its past glory. During the last
hundred years everybody born in the clan outclassed each other when it came to
valour. Adithyavarman, son of Vijayaalaya Chozhan invaded Thondaimandalam.
His son Emperor Paranthaka brought Madurai and the entire Srilanka under his
rule. It was difficult to say which of the four sons of Paranthaka was better than
the other. One of them died in the battle at the Pandya Kingdom. Paranthaka’s
first son Rajadithyan faced the huge army of Kannara Thevan of Twin Provinces
at a place called Thakkolam. He crushed the invading army and was killed by
deceit. He was killed while seated on an elephant. The epithet “The King Who
Died Atop An Elephant” stuck to his name. Kandaraathithar was devoted to
Lord Shiva; and yet his valour was no less than his predecessors. But after the
battle at Thakkolam the fame of the Chozha Empire had gone down a little. It
was restored to its full glory by Emperor Sundara Chozhan.

People who walked in the funeral procession of Adithya Karikalan were of the
view that none in the valiant Chozha clan could be compared to the slain Prince.
He shone much brighter than most of his ancestors. He entered the Sevur
Battlefield when he was hardly twelve. His acts of valour there, people said,
could be compared only to those of the legendary Abhimanyu, son of the
celebrated Pandava, Arjuna.

Several rumours were doing round on why Karikalan preferred to stay in
Kancheepuram and did not visit the Chozha capital of Thanjavur during the past
few years. One version said that the Chieftains were cunningly planning to
crown Madhuranthakan and they prevented Adithya Karikalan from visiting
Thanjavur.

Another version was more flattering to the slain Prince. Once upon a time a
Chozha King Karikal Valavan invaded North India and hoisted the Tiger Flag on

the top of Himalayas. Adithya Karikalan, his namesake, wanted to repeat that
glorious feat. He had taken a solemn vow not to come to Thanjavur before
accomplishing that feat. While Karikalan was raring to go on an invasion spree
Pazhuvettaraiyars and others were blocking his way. That was another version.

In these circumstances if people were to hear about the death of their beloved
Crown Prince, and if they were to know that he was slain in Sambuvaraiyar’s
Palace, it was easy to imagine the state of their minds. It was no wonder that
hundreds of thousands of people from the remote corners of the Kingdom came
to take part in the funeral procession.

When the procession reached Thanjavur it had swollen into an ocean of people.
The people of Thanjavur and the soldiers of the Southern Regiment who were
camping outside the Fort at that time joined in the procession. The Chief
Minister warned that if all the people are let into the Fort there might be many
serious complications. On his advice the grief-stricken Emperor and his family
came out of the court to see the dead body of the Crown Prince.

As soon as the people saw the Emperor the entire crowd erupted into a loud wail.
History books say that during Sundara Chozhan’s reign people never cried.
Before Adithya Karikalan’s untimely death people as a group did not have any
reason to cry.

But on that fateful day the wailing sound of people shook the skies. Many
remembered the pathetic state of Arjuna after he lost his dear son Abhimanyu in
the battle of Mahabharata. At least Abhimanyu fought alone and died a warrior’s
death in an epic war. But Karikalan? He was the victim of Madhuranthakan’s
greed and the conspiracy of the chieftains. Several things happened at that time
to vindicate the people’s thoughts.

The body of Adithya Karikalan was placed outside the Thanjavur Fort so as to
enable people to pay their last respects to the warrior. People, even those who
had not seen the Crown Prince earlier, came to see the body with tears in their
eyes. But Madhuranthakan never came. Nor did the Pazhuvettaraiyars.

Rumours were rampant that Pazhuvettaraiyars were busy gathering forces. Even
after the funeral was over and the Royal family went back to the Palace people
did not disperse.

“Madhuranthakan Down! Down!”

“Pazhuvettaraiyars Down! Down!”

These slogans were at first heard here and there. The volume was low. But
suddenly it went up. A faction of the crowd forcibly opened the gates of the Fort
and barged in. They went directly to the Pazhuvettaraiyars’ Palace.

“Pazhuvettaraiyars Down! Down!”

There was fury in their collective voice. The Chief Minister was worried as it
might deteriorate into a law and order problem. He had to seek the help of
King’s Bodyguards, the Velakkara Force, to quell the rebellion.

There was a flash rumour that Madhuranthakan was hiding in the house of the
Chief Minister. His house was surrounded by people.

“Where is that coward Madhuranthakan? Ask him to come out. Right now.”

Madhuranthakan was actually hiding in the Chief Minister’s house at that time.
He heard the voice of people. He could sense the people’s fury. He was
trembling. He begged the Chief Minister: “Minister Sir, please send me out of
the Fort through some secret passage. I want to be with my friends who support
me. If you help me now I promise you that I will make you my Chief Minister
when I ascend the Chozha Throne.”

“Why should we discuss ascension, Prince, when Emperor Sundara Chozhan is
very much alive?”

“Didn’t you see the Emperor when he returned after performing the funeral for
his son? Didn’t you see how weak he was, how pale his face was? I was
watching him from this terrace. I don’t think he will live for long. Either
Arulmozhivarman or I have to be crowned the King. Emperor Sundara Chozhan
wants me to succeed him. I can’t see what objection you or my mother can have
in my becoming a King.”

“There are reasons, Prince. Strong reasons. Do you think we will object without
a reason? Now listen to the voice of people. Do you think the Emperor’s consent
is enough? What about the people?”

The Chief Minister looked down and exclaimed:

“Oh My God! What’s happening?”

The slogans had changed now.

“Hail Prince Arulmozhivarman!”

“Hail The One Who Conquered Srilanka!”

“Hail Ponniyin Selvan!”

Prince Arulmozhivarman was riding on a majestic Arabian steed. All the people
followed him. Hundreds of people had gathered before the Chief Minister’s
house. All of them went behind the Prince and soon the place was deserted.
Madhuranthakan stood behind the Chief Minister and witnessed the scene. His
eyes shone in inexpressible jealousy.

“I don’t know what attraction the boy has!” Madhuranthakan murmured to
himself.

Aniruddha Brahmarayar opened another sensitive topic for discussion.

“When Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar ran in pursuit of the persons who killed the
Lankan Queen you were there in the underground passage. How?”

“When Ponniyin Selvan came inside the Fort as a mahout I became restless. I
did not want to stay inside the Fort when he was there. Pazhuvettaraiyar had
shown the underground passage to me. I thought of using that route. I was going

around the palace garden. At that time somebody came out of the underground
passage. He told me, “Prince, I have come to see you. Kandhanmaran and Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar sent me here to take you to their place. Huge armies are ready
to support your right for the throne.”

His appearance was suspicious. “If a large army is ready why should I come out
of the Fort? Let the army come here, defeat the Kodumbalur army and make sit
on the throne.”

He then told me, “Not only that, Prince. A dreadful mystery surrounds your
birth. Nobody else will tell you. I will share with you.”

I replied, “Then come with me. Let’s go.”

For which he replied, “I have got an urgent message to be delivered to the Chief
Minister. You go to the underground passage and wait for me. I will join you
soon.

I was waiting for him there. Chief Minister, did he come to see you? What could
be the dreadful mystery connected to my birth?”

“Prince, the only person who has the right to tell you is your mother, Queen
Mother Sembianmadevi. I know a little; but I can’t tell you.”

At this time sounds of footsteps were heard at the entrance. The Chief Minister
peered his neck to see who the visitor was. His face beamed.

“Your mother has come, Prince.”

Queen Mother Sembianmadevi greeted the womenfolk in the house and then
climbed up the stairs to meet the Chief Minister. Her face was lined with grief.
The Chief Minister stood up to welcome her. The Queen Mother sat down. She
looked down for sometime. The streets were silent now as there was nobody
there. An uncomfortable silence reigned in the terrace as well. Queen Mother
strained herself to speak. She saw the Minister and Madhuranthakan.

“Minister Sir, my husband placed this huge burden on my head and has gone to
be with his Lord. If only he were with me now I would not have this much of
pain and suffering.”

The words made her son Madhuranthakan furious.

“Why do you suffer? Why do you take my father’s name so often? It is almost
certain that I am going to ascend the Chozha throne. There was only one major
obstacle in my way of becoming the King. That is Karikalan. He is dead. My
other rival, Prince Arulmozhivarman is much younger to me. When I am alive
they will never crown him. Ma, I beg of you, you should help me. If you can’t
help at least don’t block my way. Has anybody heard of a mother who betrays
her own son? You are an ardent devotee of Lord Shiva. Why do you want to let
down your own son? Tell me, Ma.”

“A mother acting against the wishes of her child is the worst type of betrayal.
Yes, I know. But I am helpless, because it is my late husband’s orders Is it not
my duty to fulfil his wishes? Please listen to me. Getting attached to land is
vicious. The desire to rule a Kingdom is only more so. No head in the world has

more grief than the one which wears a crown. There is no one as restless as the
man who sits on the throne. Veerapandiyan had to lose his head for the only
reason he had a crown on it. The bliss of Lord Shiva’s world of love is a million
times sweeter than the bliss of this world. Come, my son. It is high time we
leave this place. Let’s go on a long pilgrimage. Let our pilgrimage extend up to
the abode of Lord Shiva, Kailas. Let’s earn the love of the Lord, son.”

“Yours is the right age to go on a pilgrimage, not mine. I have not seen the pains
and pleasures of this worldly life. You brought me up with the holy ash smeared
all over my body like a mad man. It is because of the love of that great Lord
Shiva that the throne has come to me now. Why should I let it go?”

“You don’t understand, my son. The throne is coming to you with all its
attendant dangers. One obstacle is gone. Adithya Karikalan is dead. You told me
so. But didn’t you hear the people shouting slogans? Madhuranthaka, people
think that you and Pazhuvettaraiyars killed Karikalan. How will they accept you
as their Emperor?”

“People will forget all that. Quite soon. Once I ascend the throne they will accept
me as their Emperor. Listen, do you know who killed Karikalan?
Arulmozhivarman’s dearest friend, Vandhiya Thevan. They discovered him
standing in the place where Karikalan’s body was found. They have jailed
Vandhiya Thevan and Sambuvaraiyar. The truth is that Ponniyin Selvan hired
Vandhiya Thevan to kill his own brother to become the next Emperor. If people
knew that then Ponniyin Selvan’s plight will be miserable.”

Sembianmadevi’s eyes emitted fire.

“Crook! Demon! How dare you accuse Arulmozhi who is nothing but love? He
is ready to even worship you. And you malign him. I curse you. If you talk ill

about my Arulmozhi you will burn in hell fire. You will rot in hell. You will
never get salvation or liberation. You will be cursed forever.”

Madhuranthakan was even more furious.

“You bloody witch! Are you cursing your own son? And you bless my enemy.
You can’t be my mother. You never can be. “

“That is the truth. I am not your mother. I did not want to say that even today.
But because of your obstinacy you made me say that. You are not my son. I am
not your mother. Period.”

Madhuranthakan’s spoke in a low voice.

“I doubted it. Long back. Who is my mother?”

Queen Mother turned to the Chief Minister.

“Please tell him. I don’t have the heart to share the humiliation with him.”

Chief Minister spoke to Madhuranthakan.

“Prince you have hurt the noble lady who brought you up from your very young

age. You will have to know the truth some day. I think today is the day.”

He started a long narration.

When Sembianmadevi was married to Emperor Kandaraathithar like every
woman she also wanted to have a child who should one day become the Chozha
Emperor. Soon she became pregnant. It was time for delivery. Her husband, the
Emperor, was not in the capital. Two mute women, who were sisters, lived inside
the palace at that time. One of the women was expecting a child. In fact
Sembianmadevi had found that women while she was in a pilgrimage and had
brought her to the Palace. Then she came to know that the woman’s sister was
living near Thanjavur. She brought her too to help the other woman at the time
of delivery.

At the right time Sembianmadevi delivered a child. The Chief Minister had
come to greet her because the future Emperor had just been born.
Sembianmadevi was crying. She was aggrieved because the child was like a log
of wood without any movement.

“What shall I tell my husband? He will be terribly upset.” Sembianmadevi cried.
The Chief Minister gave a suggestion. The dumb woman who had delivered
twins – a boy and a girl. The Minister approached the mother and told her by
sign language that if she left her children there they will grow up in the Palace.
The lady acted as if she were possessed by some spirit. She was crazy. At first
she refused to part with her children. Then she abandoned the children and ran
away.

The Chief Minister asked her sister to handover the male child to
Sembianmadevi. He also asked her to bury Sembianmadevi’s child which
appeared to be in a state of coma ever since it was born. The Minister took the

other girl child with him. He gave the child to Azhwarkkadian and asked him to
take the child to the Pandya Kingdom.

Sembianmadevi felt guilty for having changed the children. One day she
confessed everything to her husband Emperor Kandaraathithar. The Emperor
spoke like a true saint.

“That is not an issue, dear. Let him be somebody’s child. Yet he too is a gift from
Lord Shiva. Bring up the child as if he were your own child. But see to it that the
child does not at any point of time ascend the Chozha Throne. That will be the
worst act of betrayal to the entire Chozha clan. So let’s bring him up as a devotee
of Lord Shiva. Let us bring him up in such a way that one day he will say on his
own, ‘I don’t want this Chozha Kingdom. The Kingdom of the Lord is more than
enough for me. At no point of time we should let him become the King. When
that time comes, even if I were not alive, you should be very firm and save the
clan.”

The Chief Minister’s voice was devoid of any emotions as he finished his
narration.

“Madhuranthaka, you are not the son of Kandaraathithar. Nor were you born in
the womb of Queen Mother Sembianmadevi. You were the son of an orphaned
dumb woman. This noble woman brought you up showering on you hundred
times more love and affection than what she would have done if you had been
her own child. Don’t go against her word. Listen to her. You will be benefitted.”

Chapter 49: The Unluckiest Person In The World

Madhuranthakan was like a zombie for some time. Suddenly he got up and
shouted at the Chief Minister.

“Minister, I know these are all your machinations. You love the children of
Sundara Chozhan, particularly Arulmozhivarman. You want him to be crowned.
To achieve that ignoble end you told this cock and bull story and have corrupted
my mother’s mind. Chief Minister, what harm did I do to you? Why are you
keen on destroying me? In order to achieve your political ends should I cease to
be my mother’s son? I can’t think of a more cruel conspiracy than this. And how
can you, born in a clan of Vishnu Devotees, do this to me? You are not to be
blamed. Princess Kunthavai and Prince Arulmozhivarman have instigated you to
do this.”

Chief Minister was not disturbed by the grave charges levelled against him.

“Prince, if I hated you so much I would not have saved you on that day when
you were lying unconscious under the tree in heavy rain. And don’t ever try to
malign Prince Arulmozhivarman. You know what that great warrior, the One
who conquered Lanka, is doing now? He is talking to the people and the soldiers
who have surrounded the Fort. He is trying to pacify them. He is trying to
convince them that when his uncle is alive they should not compel him to be the
King. He is telling them it is not fair. He is trying to change the minds of
people.”

“Then.. then.. .. whatever you told me a few minutes ago.. he doesn’t know,
right?”

“No, he doesn’t know. Nobody knows.”

“Why should anybody know that, Chief Minister? You agree not to open your
mouth in this matter. The Emperor just gave you a few acres of land. I will give
you the whole of Pandya Kingdom as a gift settlement to you.”

“You don’t have to give the whole of Pandya Kingdom to silence me. Your
mother’s orders are more than enough. Tell your mother.”

Madhuranthakan looked at the woman who brought him up.

Queen Mother spoke in a voice loaded with affection.

“My dear child, the Chief Minister is telling the truth. He knows the secret; not
now, but since twenty years ago. On that day he promised me, “Queen, this is
your personal secret. No one can know this without your consent. It will never
be known through my mouth. It’s a promise.’’ And he has kept his promise till
now. He has sworn to be loyal to the Chozha clan. But he has not told this even
to the Emperor till now. If I let you become the King he won’t share this secret
with anybody.”

“You are right, Ma. But I can’t continue in service. I can’t serve the dynasty with
a heart which contains a terrible lie. I will resign my post and go to serve Lord
Renganatha of Srirengam.”

“There will be no need for that, Minister. Madhuranthakan will never ascend the
Chozha Throne. He will fulfil my wish. He is going to decline the offer of this
Kingdom. Yes, my dear son. Accept my words. Please.. “

“Mother, do you mean to say that you are the only obstacle to my coronation.
Agreed, I was not born of you. But you brought me up showering more love on
me than on your own son. Why do you let me down now, Ma? What wrong did I
do to merit this betrayal?”

“My dear child, you never did any thing wrong. I was the one who did
everything wrong. I have brought you up as my own child. Now I say that you
are not my son. I know how badly you will be hurt. I would not have told this to
you at all. This terrible secret would have died with me without anybody else
knowing it. But I have to honour the word I gave my husband. I should never
betray the Chozha clan which welcomed me as a daughter-in-law. I should never
let anybody not born in the clan to ascend the Chozha throne. I should not be an
accomplice to that act of betrayal. Do you think I am happy over this
development? You will never know how it hurts me. My heart is broken. I never
had the mind to tell you the truth. I was confused. I wanted to know what exactly
my duty in these peculiar circumstances is.

“I sought the help of Nambiyandar Nambi. He explained the subtle dharma
involved in this issue. His words are still ringing my ears: “Everyone in this
world is a child of Lord Shiva. You are devoted to the Lord. You will never
discriminate between a son born of you, and a son you brought up. You will
bequeath all your personal properties to the child you brought up. But the
country is different. You need not tell the truth to the son you brought up. But
your lie should not affect somebody else’s legitimate right. To crown a person
not born in the Chozha clan is a heinous sin. You should tell the truth to your son
and to the Emperor. That and that alone is your dharma.’ My dear child, do you
think I am happy to say that you are not my child? Do you think I can tell this to
the Emperor with pride?”

Suddenly Madhuranthakan fell at the feet of his mother.

“Ma, I don’t want the Kingdom. I don’t want the throne. If you ask me to stay
here I will stay. If you want me to go on a pilgrimage I’ll go. But never ever tell
anybody that I am not your son. If you do my heart will burst unable to bear the
shame.”

There were tears in Queen Mothers eyes. She hugged Madhuranthakan and made
him sit by her side.

“Honestly I did not want this pain for you. That is the reason I tried to bring you
up as somebody who will hate this worldly kingdom but deeply attached to the
kingdom of God. I failed in my attempt. Some crooks have corrupted your mind.
It is not too late now. Make a public proclamation: “I don’t want the Kingdom.
Let Prince Arulmozhivarman be the King and rule over the mighty Chozha
Empire.” Then I will never for my life say that you are not my son publicly. I
feel bad that I had to hurt you with the truth. Accept that in the presence of the
Chief Minister. In three days time an assembly of Chieftains will be convened.
Tell the convention that you don’t want to be the King. Tell them: ‘I am not
interested in governing the country. I want to spend the rest of my life in the
service of my Lord. That is the wish of my parents. Please crown
Arulmozhivarman.’’

“Take an oath that you will never act against the interests of the Chozha Empire
even if a few Chieftains try to corrupt your mind. If you do that neither I nor the
Chief Minister will have the necessity of revealing the truth about your birth.
You can be my darling son as before. We two can go on a pilgrimage all around
the country. We will renovate the Shiva temples on our way. Arulmozhivarman
worships me. I brought him up in the same way I brought you up. He will never
go against my word.”

Madhuranthakan held his head with his hands. He was lost in thoughts for a
while.

When he spoke there was nothing but grief in his voice.

“Ever since I was a child I had some vague thoughts that used to make me sad. I
now know what they are. I can’t think of anybody more wretched than me. I am
the unluckiest person ever born on this earth. I will have to blame my stars. In
one day, in a matter of seconds, I lost my parents. I lost my lineage. I lost a vast
Empire. I lost the only chance to ascend a throne that has got a thousand years of
history behind it. I lost my friends. If this truth is known nobody will consent to
be my friend. The Chieftains who pledged their lives to see me as the King will
flee from me. Yes, I am the unluckiest person ever born in this world. Amma, I
am confused. I can’t think straight. Give me two days’ time. I will let you know
my decision.”

“What is there to think, my child? I am hardening my heart to say these words.
Either you should renounce your claim for the throne or else I should renounce
you as my son before the whole country. Either way you can’t dream of
becoming a king. What is there to think?”

Chief Minister intervened.

“Amma, there is no harm in giving two days’ time. The Cabinet and the Council
of Chieftains are being convened in three days time. Let the Prince have some
time to think.”

"Amma, does anybody else other than the Chief Minister know this secret?”

Madhuranthakan was suddenly curious. The curiosity betrayed the evil thoughts
that coursed through his mind at that time.

Queen Mother was surprised by Madhuranthakan’s excitement.

“Three other people know this secret, my son. One of the three is your late
lamented father. He is no more. The two dumb sisters know. One of them, your
biological mother was killed in the Palace two days ago. When her body was
lying in state I badly wanted to tell the truth to you. But I did not have the heart
to do so. I kept quiet. My dear son, if you want to cry over the death of your
mother, you can do so. She gave birth to you. But thereafter she did not do
anything for you. She had no connection with you. She lost her mind and
became mad. If you want to cry for her, this is the time.”

“No, not at all. I can’t think of anybody in your place, Ma. Even if you had told
me when her body was lying in the palace I would not have gone near her. Who
is the other person, Ma? Is it the other dumb woman?”

“Yes. She is your mother’s sister. She has a garden outside the Fort. She was the
one who switched you for my child who was lying lifeless like a log. She was
born deaf and dumb. She won’t tell anybody. She has a son. The mother and the
son pair are serving the Thanjavur Thalikulathar Temple by giving fresh flowers.
I support them by giving some grants.”

“I know them, Ma. I know both the mother and her son. The son’s name is
Chendan Amudhan. He was the one who helped Vandhiya Thevan escape from
this place. Does he know about this secret, Ma?”

“No, my child, he doesn’t know. The mother has promised me that she won’t tell
anybody. You need not worry about her.”

Several evil thoughts were born in Madhuranthakan’s mind at that time. He first
thought that if he removed his mother and the Chief Minister from this world
nobody would know.

‘I am not in any way bound to the Chief Minister. And this lady, though a good
lady, is not really my mother. Why should I be kind to these people? I remember
the person I met in the Emperor’s garden who said that he would reveal a secret
of my birth to me. Who is that? There was another man who asked me to wait in
the underground treasury? If only I am able to meet him.. .

He tried to kill the Emperor but ended up killing that mute woman. He is not to
be blamed. These people say that the dumb woman is my mother. Then who is my
father? Or perhaps this evil old woman and this cunning Chief Minister are
trying to deceive me? Or perhaps I am the son of Sundara Chozhan. How can I
know?’

“Let me go, my son. Think deeply and come to the right decision. I brought you
up showering my love on you as if you were my own son for the last twenty two
years. I will never hurt you. Renounce this fleeting world. And seek refuge in the
immortal world of Lord Shiva’s love.”

Something they never expected happened at that time. Prince Arulmozhivarman
walked into the room. He prostrated at the feet of Queen Mother.

“Ma, I consider the advice you gave to your son as given to me. If they say that
the Chozha throne belongs to me I am ready to renounce it. May your blessings
turn my heart towards the feet of Lord Shiva. Let me get a small place for me in
the abode of Lord Shiva, a place close to your husband, the saintly
Kandaraathithar. Bless me, Ma.”

Sembianmadevi and Aniruddha Brahmarayar exchanged meaningful glances.

“Ma, I had to overhear what you told your son a little while ago much against
my wishes. Please forgive me. I took the people who were crowded before this
building to the gates of the Fort. I wanted to discuss the future course of action
with the Chief Minister. I came in. I heard that you were also here. I was happy. I
thought it will be better that you also take part in the discussion. Your voice was
louder than usual. Madhuranthakan was also shouting. I hesitated. I was not sure
whether I can barge in. I heard a part of your conversation, Ma. You said that
amongst those who are alive today only you, the Minister and Chendan
Amudhan’s mother know the secret regarding Madhuranthakan’s birth. That is
not correct, Ma. My sister Kunthavai and I also know.

“I used to meet Mandhakini Devi – the one who laid down her life to save that of
the Emperor – frequently in Lanka. She communicated the secret to me through
the language of line drawings. I shared it with my sister. We discussed the issue
at length. We are convinced that my uncle Madhuranthakan has the exclusive
right to the Chozha throne. He has been brought up with a thousand times more
care and concern than your own son. He was born of a woman who saved me
from River Cauvery, and who saved my life several times in Srilanka. In
whatever way you look he is the heir to the Chozha throne. If there is any doubt
in the minds of anyone concerning his rights I will clear them. I hereby renounce
my claim to the Chozha throne. This I swear on your lotus feet, Ma. Hence there
is no need for you to say that Madhuranthakan is not your son. There is no need
for Madhuranthakan to renounce the Chozha throne.”

All the three who heard the words of Ponniyin Selvan were stunned as never
before. After a few minutes of silence the Chief Minister who had regained his
composure spoke:

“Prince, your words should find a place in the epics and legends of this great
country. It should be engraved on stone, on copper plates and golden plates. But
we three cannot decide the issue of succession here. We need to consult the
Emperor and the Chieftains of the Empire. We also need to think of the possible
reaction of the subjects if this secret comes out at a later stage. Only three days
are left for the meeting of the Council. Let us think deeply on the issue of
succession.”

Chapter 50: Kunthavai Shaken

Princess Kunthavai was born in royal affluence and grew up in greater affluence.
She was equal to the Goddess of Love in her looks, the Goddess of Learning in
her intelligence and the Goddess of Wealth in her fortune. Right from the
Emperor down to the last citizen, everyone adored her. At her palace there were
thousands waiting to do her bidding. The Chieftains of the Chozha Kingdom
wanted their princesses to be the maids of Kunthavai and learn from her. The
sons of the great Emperors of Bharath longed to have Kunthavai’s hand in
marriage.

The blessed and the fortunate Kunthavai, the beautiful and the intelligent
Princess was at that time submerged in a sea of grief. The warnings she had
given to her brother Adithya Karikalan had all been unheeded. She had sent an
urgent message to Karikalan insisting that he should not go to Sambuvaraiyar’s
Palace at any cost. Karikalan used to listen to her advice. But this time he did
not. And he paid the price for that. He was killed under mysterious
circumstances at the Kadambur Palace.

Kunthavai believed that Nandini was her sister and therefore Karikalan’s and
Arulmozhivarman’s sister too. Kunthavai knew that Nandini wanted to take
revenge on Karikalan for some reason. And if she had succeeded in her mission,
if Karikalan had died at the hands of Nandini, there could not be a greater
humiliation to the glorious Chozha clan. Nobody knew what happened to
Nandini after the death of Karikalan.

Losing her brother at a very young age had plunged her into endless grief. Even
two days after his death Karikalan’s face shone with valour. Kunthavai saw her
brother’s face.

‘Oh My God! What great dreams he had! Like his namesake Karikal Valavan he
wanted to conquer all the countries up to Himalayas and hoist the Tiger flag on
the top of the world’s greatest mountain. The body of that such a great warrior
was consumed by fire and in a matter of minutes it was reduced to a handful of
ashes. The ashes were strewn in the Chozha soil. From that soil thousands and
thousands of warriors will be born. They will go in all the four directions. They
will perform great acts of valour and extend the frontiers of Chozha Kingdom.
Wherever they go they will build large temples whose towers would reach the
sky. They will spread the language of Tamil, its art-forms and literature and the
religions of Saivism and Vaishnavism. The divine compositions of the three
Nayanmars, called the Devaram and the compositions of Azhwars will spread
throughout the word. ‘Vetri Vel Veera Vel’ (May our spear be successful. May it
be valiant) – this war cry will be heard throughout the world.

These are not mere dreams or aspirations; but distinct possibilities. If what the
elders, the astrology experts and experienced mothers said at the time of
Arulmozhivarman’s birth were true then he will realise the dreams of his elder
brother, Karikalan. For that Arulmozhivarman should be crowned. But how
many stumbling blocks are there! Nobody can guess how the convention of
chieftains will proceed. They may fight between themselves and complicate
things further. Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman and the Kodumbalur Chieftain are
determined to crown Arulmozhivarman. Pazhuvettaraiyars and his friends were
gathering forces to support Madhuranthakan.

The Emperor cannot decide on this issue; he is shattered by the death of his dear
ones, first Mandhakini, the Mute Queen and then his beloved first born, Adithya
Karikalan. He refuses to talk to anyone. He is still thinking of the sins he
committed in his young age. His mind is loaded with guilt. Even I, his darling
daughter, cannot approach him. What can others do?

Arulmozhivarman is ready to sacrifice the crown. He wants to place
Madhuranthakan on the throne and go with the Chozha army to the distant

nations beyond the high seas. But even that cannot happen. For some strange
reason the Queen Mother whom the whole Empire worships is dead against her
son becoming the King. She says it is because of the orders of her late husband.
How these complications will be resolved? It was difficult even to hazard a wild
guess.

In addition to all these worries another development saddened her heart. Her
beloved Vandhiya Thevan, the one who had stolen her heart, had been
imprisoned.

‘They are trying to charge him for the murder of Adithya Karikalan.
Parthibendra Pallavan is quite adamant on punishing him. Well, I can talk to my
grand father on behalf of Vandhiya Thevan. He may listen to me and my beloved
may be released. How can I, a woman, intervene on behalf of a man, accused of
murdering my own brother? If people think that I love this wanderer more than
my own brother then that will become a scandal.

Parthibendra Pallavan is capable of creating such a scandal to malign me and
my beloved. He claims that Vandhiya Thevan was caught red handed by him and
Sambuvaraiyar at the place where Karikalan’s body was found. Poor soul,
Vandhiya Thevan! He should have religiously followed my advice “Never leave
Karikalan even for a minute.” He should have tried to save him. He should have
failed.

But how can I know the truth? If I go to the prison to see him or bring him here
that will be a scandal. People will talk. Of course they may not talk about me.
Even if they do, I don’t care. But some quarters are keen to blame
Arulmozhivarman for the murder of Karikalan. If I do something rash their side
will be strengthened. No, I don’t want that to happen. At any cost.

Oh My God! Holy Mother! I have never had any worries since my birth. And this
one .. Oh My God.. it is beyond my ken, Ma.

Kunthavai’s heart was bleeding. Ever since she heard about the death of her
brother and Vandhiya Thevan’s part in that death, she did not have a wink of
sleep. She was exploring a thousand ways to solve the problem and had been
rejecting all of them for some reason or other.

She refused to share her grief with her best friend, Vanathi. Vanathi could guess
what was going on in the mind of Kunthavai. She remained silent. She was with
Kunthavai all the time like her shadow. And like that shadow she remained
absolutely silent.

Vanathi broke her vow of silence on that day.

“Akka, Akka! A woman has come to see you. She is in tears. She looks
miserable.”

Kunthavai was surprised.

“Who is she? Why has she come here? Didn’t you ask her?”

“I did. I am afraid you will be upset. She is Manimekalai, daughter of
Sambuvaraiyar. Sambuvaraiyar’s family is held in house-arrest at the palace of
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. This girl has enquired around and has come here. I
asked her what the matter was. She says that she will tell only you. Akka, if you

look at her tearful face even for a second you will melt. Your heart will change,
Akka.”

“Do you imply that I have a heart of stone?”

“Why imply? I am sure about it. You do have a heart made of the hardest stone
ever found in this world. Otherwise you would not have let Vandhiya Thevan
suffer in the underground prison.”

“We’ll discuss that later. Bring that girl”

Vanathi ran out like a deer to bring Manimekalai in.

Chapter 51: Manimekalai Seeks A Boon

Manimekalai entered Kunthavai’s chambers, her eyes darting like a frightened,
mad woman. Her appearance was miserable just as Vanathi had described. She
should have been crying for a long time. Her eyes and her face were swollen.

But somehow Kunthavai did not feel sad for her. She was in fact furious. She
could not forget the fact that all the recent calamities in the Chozha Empire
originated at the conspirators assembly convened at Sambuvaraiyar’s Palace a
few months ago. And to cap it all her dear brother Karikalan was killed in that
accursed palace.

Suddenly she remembered something. This girl’s brother and Vandhiya Thevan
were close friends. Vandhiya Thevan had been to Kadambur Palace for the first
time only to honour the long standing invitation of his best friend. He happened
to see the proceedings of the conspirators’ assembly and told about it. Once
Kandhanmaran was keen on marrying off his sister to Vandhiya Thevan. This
girl should be that sister.

Kunthavai now had a new interest in that girl.

Why has she come here? To plead for her father and her brother? When
Karikalan was invited to Kadambur there was a proposal of marriage –
Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter should marry Karikalan. Perhaps this girl should
have lost her heart to Karikalan. Perhaps she lost her mind because the man she
was to marry died all of a sudden. Has she come here to talk about that
marriage?

Or perhaps...... perhaps.... Kandhanmaran should have spoken to this girl about
his friend. Vandhiya Thevan has stayed in her Palace. He had been there on an
earlier occasion as well. Perhaps she has lost her mind to Vandhiya Thevan. He
is sure to have rejected her advances. She must have come now to take revenge
on Vandhiya Thevan for spurning her advances. She might level grave charges
against him.

All these thoughts flashed through the mind of Kunthavai in a few seconds.
Kunthavai stared daggers at Manimekalai, as if she wanted to pierce her heart
and know its contents. Manimekalai could not withstand the stare. She looked
down. Two tear drops fell on the ground before Manimekalai.

“Hey girl, why are you crying? Your brother is still alive. It was my brother who
was brutally killed at your Palace. I am the one who should cry. Look at me. I
am not crying. I am not shedding tears. Women born in a valiant clan never cry
for the death of warriors.”

Manimekalai looked up.

“Devi, if my brother had died in war I would not have cried. But your brother..
your brother.. die.. “

Manimekalai broke into a sob.

Kunthavai’s doubts were confirmed. Yes, this girl should have lost her heart to
Karikalan. She can’t bring herself to say that openly. Poor soul, I have to console

her.

“This is the time to control yourself and harden your heart. Tell me what’s in
your heart. The one who died is not your brother. He is my brother. Why should
you cry for his death? Perhaps you are upset because the tragedy happened when
he was a guest at your place. What can you do, dear? There were several elders
in your house. It is their responsibility, not yours.”

"No Devi. The responsibility is entirely mine. That is why I can’t control my
grief in spite of my best efforts. Tears don’t seem to stop. When I realise that I
killed him with my own hand.. . it seems my heart may burst unable to bear the
grief and the guilt.”

Kunthavai was taken aback.

“ What the hell are you blabbering? Are you all right? Are you mad or what?”

“No, Devi. I am not mad. I may become mad soon if this state continues any
longer. What I said is nothing but the truth. I am the killer. I killed Adithya
Karikalan. I came here to confess my crime and get the punishment I deserve.”

“ That’s a scandal. My brother, one of the greatest warriors of the country dying
at the hands of a woman! Fat chance. Do you want me to believe that kind of
nonsense? Tell me who tutored you to make this false confession.”

“No one, Devi. Nobody believes me. Even my father and my brother do not

believe my word.”

“Why are you spinning this yarn? Why are you bluffing? Your father and your
brother must have tutored you to talk like this. Or else you are saying this out of
your imagination to save your father and your brother.”

“Why should I save them, Devi? They tried to get me married against my
wishes. First they wanted me to marry Madhuranthakan. Then they brought
Adithya Karikalan before me and asked me to marry him. They told me that if I
married him I can sit on the Chozha Throne as its Empress. They never asked me
what is in my heart. They wanted to sacrifice me in the altar of their greed. Why
should I support them, Devi? Why should I put the blame on my head for their
sake? No way.”

“Every statement you make is stranger and more mysterious than the other.
Many Princesses have been waiting for the good fortune of marrying Adithya
Karikalan. When your people wanted you to marry such a valiant prince why do
you call that as a sacrifice for their selfish ends? Why do you think that being
married into the Chozha clan will make your life miserable?”

“I don’t have a sister. I consider you as my own sister and share this with you.”

“You said a little while ago that you killed my brother. Then how do you dare to
call me your sister?” Kunthavai was fuming.

“I have that right, Devi. Karikalan considered me as his sister. He has even
written a note to that effect. When I think of that note and what I did to him my
heart is bursting in guilt. I have come here to seek retribution for the heinous sin

I committed, Devi.”

Kunthavai now addressed Vanathi in a very soft voice:

“Poor girl! She has really lost her mind. Why did you bring her here in this
state? What if she goes out of control? How can we manage her here?”

“Sorry, Akka. I too am sad for her. Don’t use harsh words on her. Speak softly.
And send her back as soon as possible.”

Kunthavai now spoke to Manimekalai in a condescending voice.

“Girl, what has happened has happened. All because of Destiny. You don’t have
to feel sad about tit. You can consider me as your sister. No issues on that. You
wanted to tell me something, right? If you are in a mood to tell, I am all ears. But
if you are not ready now we can meet on another occasion.”

“No, no. I will tell you right now. You are a woman. You can understand another
woman’s feelings. Men can never understand us, women. They don’t even try to.
Imagine a situation like this. A woman has lost her heart to a good man. Her man
is alone, unarmed and helpless. Suppose another person draws his sword and
runs up to her lover trying to kill him. If the woman truly loves the man what
will she do? Will she be a mere spectator?”

Kunthavai was reminded of Mandhakini’s act of sacrifice in saving the life of an
emperor. She had tears in her eyes.

“How can she be a spectator? She will go in between and will even give up her
life to save that of her lover.”

“It is my bad time there was nobody by my side to give this advice. I listened to
that evil woman Nandini and lost everything in my life. I killed the kind man
who loved me as his sister. I killed the warrior who had promised me to unite me
with my beloved. I killed him with my own hands.”

Kunthavai turned to Vanathi and whispered. “She is becoming more hysterical.
She has completely lost her mind.”

Then she turned to Manimekalai and shouted.

“Please don’t cry. Tell me what happened. Or else, we can have this discussion at
some other time.”

“No, Akka. I will tell everything right now. My brother Kandhanmaran had been
telling me about a friend of his for quite some time. He visited our Kadambur
Palace a few months ago. The moment I saw him I decided that he was my
beloved. And my soul mate.”

There was a mild shiver in Kunthavai’s voice.

“Who is that lucky fellow who stole your heart?”

“You call him lucky? When my heart went to him my bad luck also went along.
Today he is incarcerated in the underground prison of Thanjavur. Akka, the
women at the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace told me that the underground prison
would be horrible. And nobody has come out of it alive.”

“A clear lie. I and this girl Vanathi had been to the underground prison some
time ago.”

“Can I go, Devi? Can I have a look at him?”

“You have not yet told me who the guy is.”

“The Prince of Vallam, Vandhiya Thevan.”

Kunthavai and Vanathi exchanged meaningful glances.

Vanathi intervened.

“Why do you bother about him? In what way are you connected to him?”

Manimekalai was stung.

“Who are you to ask that?”

Soon Manimekalai regained her composure.

“Sorry. Please don’t take it amiss. I didn’t mean it. Aren’t you the Kodumbalur
Princess, Vanathi? Your uncle is now in charge of this Thanjavur Fort, right? Let
me fall at your feet and beg a boon of you. Please grant me that boon, Goddess.
Ask your uncle to release Vandhiya Thevan from the underground prison. Let me
be imprisoned in his place. I was the one who killed Prince Karikalan. When I
am here to confess the crime it is neither fair nor just to punish somebody else.

“I also beg of you, Devi Kunthavai. If Kodumbalur Chieftain does not render
justice in this case then I want to plead directly to the Emperor. You will have to
help me, Devi.”

Kunthavai’s heart was like a boat caught on a turbulent sea of emotions.

I am still hesitant to visit Vandhiya Thevan in his cell. But this girl has come
forward to confess a crime which she might not have probably done, to save her
beloved. But is she speaking the truth? Or has she let her imagination run wild
to save her lover? But didn’t she speak of Nandini’s evil advice to her. Perhaps
she was lured by Nandini to do the atrocious act of killing Karikalan.

No, no. She could not have done that act. She is lying only to save Vandhiya
Thevan. I can gauge it from her words and from her body language. Nobody will
believe her. And nobody will release Vandhiya Thevan let alone acquit him based
on this girl’s confession. Let me try to gather more information from her.
Karikalan’s death is shrouded in mystery. Let me see if this girl can give me

information to unravel it.

“Manimekalai, I appreciate your determination. I appreciate your love for
Vandhiya Thevan. You are ready to make a damning confession to save your
lover. We have heard of this kind of love only in stories and legends. It is really
sad that there are no great Sangam poets alive today to compose songs on your
selfless love. I may believe you; but others won’t. Your father and brother have
been saying that Vandhiya Thevan was found near the dead body of Karikalan.
Tell me, will the people believe their words or yours. There is another reason I
can’t believe you. It was I who sent Vandhiya Thevan to my brother Karikalan. I
had given strict instructions that he should prevent Karikalan going to Kadambur
at any cost. If he can’t do that then he should go along with Karikalan. And
while in Kadambur Vandhiya Thevan had strict orders not to be away from
Karikalan even for a second. Moreover Vandhiya Thevan is a personal body
guard of Karikalan. And he has been with the Prince at the time of his death.
Even then Vandhiya Thevan failed to save him. He should have given his life to
save the life of Karikalan. He did not do that. Even assuming that Vandhiya
Thevan did not kill my brother he has clearly failed in his duty. And he ought to
be punished for that.”

“Devi, he never swerved from his duty.”

“Is there any evidence for that, apart from your word?”

“Here it is, Devi. A letter written by your brother, Karikalan.”

Manimekalai took out a palm leaf tucked to her waist. She gave it to Kunthavai.
Kunthavai accepted the leaf with her eyes widening in surprise.

She studied the writing on the leaf. Yes it was Karikalan’s handwriting. He had
written it himself because he did not want anybody else to know the contents.
The letter was addressed to Kunthavai.

“This letter is to my dear sister, the Emperor’s darling daughter, the Junior
Queen, Kunthavai Devi from her brother Adithya Karikalan.

I have not slept for several years. Three years ago I committed a heinous sin. I
killed an enemy who had taken refuge in me. He and the person who pleaded on
his behalf have been tormenting me. They never let me sleep in peace.

It was very early in the morning. I could not sleep as usual. I was loitering in the
garden. I saw the comet falling from the sky. Something left my body at the same
time. What remains is just the shell. Sister, let this bad omen have all its effect
only on me. Let Lord Ekambareswara keep our father and Prince Arulmozhi
safe.

Sister, when we were young, we used to dream a lot about our Chozha Empire.
We wanted to add glories to the already glorious Empire. I could not realise any
of those dreams. But I am sure my brother Arulmozhi will do it. He is born to
rule over all the three worlds. He will be ably supported by the Prince of Vallam,
Vandhiya Thevan.

Devi, I am happy to learn Vandhiya Thevan did whatever you asked him to do.
Otherwise you would not have sent him on this crucial assignment of saving me
from my destiny.

Sister, if anything happens to me here, it is only due to my Destiny and my

adamant temperament. No, Vandhiya Thevan is not to be blamed. As you
instructed him he tried his best to stop me from going to Kadambur. He failed
because of my obstinacy. Even after he came here he is following me like a
shadow. And to help him in his mission he became friends with Sambuvaraiyar’s
daughter, Manimekalai.

With her help he finds out my itinerary and goes there even before I go. He is
striving hard to save me from danger. But no one can be saved from the clutches
of destiny.

They say that small creatures will be lured by the beauty of the dancing cobra
and they will go near the snake on their own will only to end up as its prey. I am
going to Nandini in the same way. You had warned me that she is our sister. I
could not believe that. There is another secret concerning her birth. I am going
to her only to know that secret. I am sure I will know it today.

I don’t know what will happen to me. It is not in my hands. But Vandhiya Thevan
cannot be blamed.. He has been meticulously following your instructions.

Sister, Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran are fully caught in the seductive net of
Nandini. Vandhiya Thevan is the only man who did not fall for her evil charm. I
don’t know what gift I can give him. There is a smart girl in Sambuvaraiyar’s
Palace – I mean Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter Manimekalai. I love her like my own
sister. If Manimekalai’s hand is given in marriage to Vandhiya Thevan it will be
valuable gift for him. But I don’t know, Sister, whether you will like this alliance.

My dear sister, I am giving this palm leaf only to that girl. Thank God, she can’t
read. Whatever you want to do with her please do it. You are the most intelligent
person in our family. I did not listen to your advice. And I am going to pay for it.
At least let our brother Arulmozhi take your advice and bring glory to our great

Chozha Empire.”

The letter abruptly ended there. Kunthavai was jerked into tears.

"How did you get this leaf? Who gave this to you?”

“Devi, the Prince himself gave it to me. Nandini had told me several bad things
about Prince Karikalan. I did not have any opinion of him. I first thought that he
was giving a love letter to me. I wanted to burn this leaf soon after I got it from
him. But I was curious to know what he could have written to me. I saved the
leaf. I made my friend Chandramathi read it for me. Prince Karikalan considered
me as his own sister. To think that I have killed that noble soul with my own
hands.. . my heart is going to burst Devi. Let no mercy be shown to me, Devi.
Please get me the harshest punishment for wilfully murdering Adithya
Karikalan.”

Her excitement, her emotional rendering, her body language which showed a
sense of purpose and urgency, made it very clear that she was concocting
everything to save Vandhiya Thevan. But the palm leaf was not a concoction. It
was real. And that was Karikalan’s own handwriting. That small leaf was
sufficient to get Vandhiya Thevan released from jail. It would be better if
Manimekalai did not mess up things. If she were to talk like this at the time of
trial it would only complicate things and delay the release of Vandhiya Thevan.

“Manimekalai do you still insist that you killed Karikalan?”

“Yes, Devi.”

“You told me that you had your friend read this letter. Why should you kill a
man who loved you like his own sister?”

“If only I had read the leaf earlier I would not have done this crime, Devi. I
killed him without knowing what is in his mind. That devil Nandini had
corrupted my mind.”

“How?”

“She told me that Karikalan hated Vandhiya Thevan. And that the Crown Prince
was keen to kill him. She used to say that quite often. As if to vindicate her
words Karikalan will be roaming in the Palace holding a drawn sword. During
the final moments Karikalan was in a state of frenzy. ‘Where is Vandhiya
Thevan? I shall kill him right now.’ He said that several times. I thought it was
true and used my knife.. . “

“Let’s not talk about that any more. I may believe that a weak, timid girl killed
the most valiant Karikalan. But the world will not believe that.”

“But tell me who else could have killed him? In the dark room where
Karikalan’s body was first found only Vandhiya Thevan and I were there. If he
did not kill him then I am the only person who could have killed him.”

“By these words you are insulting my dead brother. I will explain another
dimension to your claim. Let us assume that you confess to killing the Crown
Prince. Do you think Vandhiya Thevan will remain silent? In the same way you

want to save him, will he not try to save you? The Court may pardon you
because you are a woman. But they will never pardon him. If a member of the
King’s family is killed do you know how harsh will be the punishment? They
will make him stand in the centre of a busy street and.. “

Manimekalai broke down crying. Amidst sobs she pleaded to Kunthavai:

“Akka, you should save him. Only you can do it.”

Chapter 52: The Barrier to Freedom

Princess Kunthavai was worried about Manimekalai. She wanted to provide
some solace to her. But how? Her heart was in a state of turbulence – it held
more grief and worry than it had never in the past. Kunthavai could not even
think properly. She remained silent.

They heard a noise coming from the entrance of the Palace.

“Vanathi, find out what’s happening. People tend to forget that the Emperor is
very sick and is still in a state of shock. Why are they making so much noise?”

Vanathi ran up to the entrance and came back excited.

“Akka, he is coming.”

“Who is that ‘he’?” Kunthavai asked with a smile.

“It’s him, Akka. Your brother.”

“Oh, please take this girl away.”

Vanathi hesitated.

“Quick, Vanathi. He won’t go without seeing you. I will send word for you. Now
take this girl and go away.”

No sooner than Vanathi left the place Arulmozhivarman entered the room.

“What is happening, Thambi? I heard that the people are always gathered behind
you shouting slogans and creating a ruckus. And you have brought them to the
gates of the Palace. Did you consider the plight of our poor father? He is still
grieving and this ruckus will only hurt him more.”

“I am helpless. I too am grieving, Akka. Before the body of the greatest warrior,
Karikalan, was fully burnt, these people have started shouting, ‘Arulmozhi on
the throne.’ I can’t bear to hear these slogans. At times I think of running away
from the country without telling anybody. But I am afraid that will only
aggravate the problem. People might think that Madhuranthakan and the
Chieftains have murdered me. And that may give rise to more serious
complications, Akka.”

“Forget that idea right now. Forget the people. The Emperor’s heart will burst in
grief. He could not bear the death of Mandhakini and Karikalan. Please don’t
add to his worries.”

“That is why I am reluctant to flee the country. I am striving to convince people
and get their acceptance to crown Madhuranthakan. When I talk people listen to
me with rapt attention. But when I turn to go they start shouting slogans. I go
away thinking naively that I have changed their minds. Thirukkovalur

Malaiyaman and the Kodumbalur Chieftain talk to the people and change their
minds again. I have come to you to complain against them. You should talk to
them. They don’t listen to me. Perhaps they may listen to your sane counsel.”

“I tried my best, Thambi. They are stubborn. I can’t change them. We have to
think of some other strategy.”

“Akka, you would not have revealed that information to Kodumbalur Chieftain.
If you did he won’t insist on making me the King.”

“What is that information, Thambi?”

“You should tell him about the terrible vow taken by your friend Vanathi. She
has taken a vow not to sit with me in the Chozha Throne. If the Kodumbalur
Chieftain knew that he won’t be interested in making me the King.”

“Do you think I would not have told that to him yet? You know his response?
‘Do you want to ruin the empire because of the obstinacy of a silly girl? If not
Vanathi there are hundreds of princesses waiting in line for the Prince. They are
ready to worship him. They will ascend the throne if we want them to. They will
go on the gallows if we want them to.” He said that and cast a furious glance at
his niece. Vanathi was thoroughly shaken.”

Arulmozhivarman smiled. “Thank God, she did not faint at that time.”

The Prince looked around.

Kunthavai knew what was in his mind.

“I have sent Vanathi for some work.”

“Akka, if you and Vanathi are firmly on my side we can manage. Let us take the
case to the Emperor. The two old men will be bound only by his words.”

“That is not as easy as you think. There is another stumbling block: The Queen
Mother. If she insists that Madhuranthakan should not be crowned then the
Emperor will have no option. He may even lose his mind. I am afraid to trouble
the Emperor on this account.”

“Then let us first meet Sembianmadevi and pray to her to change her mind. The
reason she does not want Madhuranthakan to be crowned is what we guessed,
Akka. I met her a little while ago at the Minister’s palace. She told the truth to
Madhuranthakan only today. You should have seen our uncle’s face when he
heard the words, ‘You are not my son’ from the Queen Mother. His handsome
face became the face of a devil. Thank God I went there at the right time.”

“What happened after that?”

“I folded my hands towards our grandmother and pleaded “Ma, I know that
Madhuranthakan was not born of you. So what, Ma? The child you brought up is
your child. So he is the one who should be crowned.”

“What was Sembianmadevi’s response to that?”

“I came back before she could respond.”

“Thambi! Didn’t you tell her that even though Madhuranthakan is not
Sembianmadevi’s son he has the right to the throne? Didn’t you tell her that he is
our father’s own son and that he is your elder brother?”

“No, Akka. I didn’t.”

“Why? Are you afraid that it will malign our father’s name? Or did you want to
tell at a later time?”

“No, Akka. I learnt that what we thought in this matter is absolutely baseless.
That’s why I didn’t tell that to her.”

“What are you saying?”

“The truth, Akka. The Chief Minister knows every thing. Two years after our
father returned from Lanka Madhuranthakan and Nandini were born as twins to
Mandhakini Devi. So they can’t be our brother and sister, Akka.”

Kunthavai thought for some time.

“Arulmozhi, do you still wish to give the throne for Madhuranthakan? Even
after knowing about his birth?”

“Yes, Akka. Madhuranthakan was born out of Mandhakini Devi’s womb. He was
brought up by Sembianmadevi. I don’t have any desire to become the King.
Your friend Vanathi is also not keen to ascend the throne.”

“Thambi, in the great epic Ramayana, Lord Rama’s brother Bharatha refused to
be the King and went to the forest to invite Lord Rama back to the country.
When the boat-man Guha comes to know of this, he exclaims to Bharatha,
“Even a thousand Ramas cannot be your equal.” The Chozha people, when they
know of your sacrifice, will say, “Even a thousand Bharathas cannot be your
equal, Ponniyin Selva.”

“Let them say whatever they want to. I want to escape from their clutches now. I
have finally devised a strategy. I want your views on that, Akka.”

“What’s the strategy, Thambi.”

“Do you know that the Pazhuvettaraiyars are mobilising a huge army near
Kudanthai?”

“I know. I also know that many chieftains are on their side. But I learn that the
army is quite small. If our grandfather Malaiyaman and Kodumbalur Chieftain
go out to face them, their entire army will be destroyed in sixty minutes.”

“I have got a strategy to avert that disaster. I will go alone on a horse back and
entrust myself to the Pazhuvettaraiyars. They will imprison me. Then our
grandfather and the Kodumbalur Chieftain can do nothing.”

Kunthavai was quite surprised.

“Brilliant. But there is a small hitch.”

“What hitch?”

“When you reach the place the soldiers in their army will raise slogans
supporting you. “Hail Ponniyin Selvan! Hail Arulmozhivarman! Instead of
imprisoning you they will imprison the Pazhuvettaraiyars.”

Arulmozhivarman was baffled.

“Yes, Akka. That risk is there. I didn’t know that. Thank God, you warned me. I
entered the Thanjavur Fort in the guise of a mahout. I will go there in disguise.”

“How long can you hide yourself, Thambi? Even if one person knows within a
few minutes everybody will know. Then people from the surrounding towns and
villages will gather at that place to support you.”

Arulmozhivarman’s face fell.

“Then what do you want me to do? Why was I born in this world? Only to hurt
others? It could have been better if I had drowned in Cauvery as a child.”

“Who knows, Thambi? Perhaps what the astrologers and palmists said about
your future is true. Even if you don’t want it the crown and the throne will come
to you. It’s all because of your stars, Thambi.”

“What is this, Akka? Have you also joined sides with our grandfather,
Malaiyaman? Have you changed your mind, Akka?”

“Grandfather’s advice did not change my heart, Thambi. But our brother
Karikalan’s letter changed it. He has written that you will fulfil all his dreams.
When I read that.. ..”

Kunthavai broke down.

Ponniyin Selvan got the leaf from her and read it. There were tears in his eyes
too.

When Kunthavai spoke again there was an unusual firmness in her voice.

“I don’t care what you think. Let me tell you what’s in my mind. When I learn
that Madhuranthakan and Nandini do not belong to our clan my mind is at rest. I
don’t have the heart to make a person not born in our clan to become the Chozha
Emperor. Yes, I adore Sembianmadevi. And I worship Mandhakini Devi. But

even then I can’t sacrifice the throne for their children. I can’t bear to see
Madhuranthakan as the King.”

“Akka, Akka! What are you talking? I vowed before Sembianmadevi and the
Chief Minister that I don’t want to become the king. I have told thousands of
people that I am not interested to become their king. Do you want me to go back
on my word?”

“Thambi, I am confused. I don’t know what should do now. Our family deity
Goddess Durga Parameswari should show the way ahead for use. I don’t know
what suggestion I can give you. If only Adithya Karikalan had listened to my
words this situation would not have arisen at all. Why should that great warrior
meet with this tragic fate?”

Kunthavai bemoaned her fate.

“Akka, how did you get this palm leaf? Who gave it to you? When did you see
it? Why didn’t you tell me about this leaf earlier?”

“I saw this only a few minutes ago. Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter Manimekalai
brought this here.”

“Yes, yes. I too have heard of Manimekalai. How did she get this palm leaf?”

“She is there. You can ask her. I don’t know whether we can trust her.”

Kunthavai had originally planned to present Manimekalai to Arulmozhivarman
as soon as he came in. She wanted her to talk about Vandhiya Thevan. In the
midst of the very serious conversation that happened, a corner of Kunthavai’s
mind was constantly thinking of Vandhiya Thevan languishing in the
underground prison. But she did not want to broach the subject on her own. She
was looking for the right opportunity. She got that opportunity now. She called
Vanathi aloud and asked her to bring Manimekalai.

Manimekalai was crying as she re-entered the room. Ponniyin Selvan knew that
she had enough reason to cry.

“Thambi, this is Manimekalai. She brought this palm leaf. Ask her how she got
it.”

Arulmozhivarman spoke to her in a very soft voice.

“Sister, you gave us the last letter written by our brother Karikalan. For this act
of kindness we will be indebted to you forever. “

Before Arulmozhivarman could continue Manimekalai fell at his feet.

“Prince! Ponniyin Selva! Is that a promise? If it is true that you are indebted to
me.. then..”

Manimekalai could not continue. She broke down.

“Akka, why is she crying? Perhaps she is sad that our brother happened to die in
her house.”

“No, Thambi. She has something else in her mind. Manimekalai, tell him what
you told me.”

“Prince, I killed your brother. Throw me into the underground prison and please
release him.”

“Akka, what is she saying? Is she sane?”

“As of now she loos so. But if we do not release Vandhiya Thevan from the
prison soon, she will really become insane.”

“Who? Who is in the underground prison?”

“Thambi, have you forgotten the warrior of the Vaana Clan through whom I sent
a message to you?”

“OH MY GOD!”

Prince Arulmozhivarman appeared to have woken up from a long dream. His
mind was pre-occupied by the great events that happened soon after he entered
the Thanjavur Fort. Ever since he heard the death news of his brother he was
focussed on making Madhuranthakan the King. He had completely forgotten

Vandhiya Thevan. Now when he heard his name he jumped.

“OH MY GOD! WHAT DID YOU SAY? IS MY DEAR FRIEND VANDHIYA
THEVAN IN JAIL? WHAT FOR? WHO PUT HIM IN JAIL?”

Kunthavai told him what she heard from Manimekalai.

Ponniyin Selvan heard the whole story.

“Akka, you will never find a more ungrateful animal than I. I never cared to
enquire about Vandhiya Thevan. That’s my fault. I am guilty. And those who
dared to imprison him are guiltier than me. I know how he devoted was he to our
brother Karikalan. Who dared to make him responsible for Karikalan’s death?
What is this foolishness? This girl has put the blame on herself to free him. She
is teaching a lesson to all of us. I feel very small besides this girl. I am ashamed
even to look at her. Let other things wait. First things first. Let me go to the
underground prison and free Vandhiya Thevan. I will bring him here. Meanwhile
you console Sambuvaraiyar’s daughter.”

Prince Arulmozhivarman almost ran out of the room. When he reached the door
as if on cue, Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman and the Kodumbalur Chieftain
materialised from nowhere. Their strange appearance sowed many doubts in the
mind of Prince Arulmozhivarman.

Kodumbalur Chieftain placed his long spear on the way as if to block the
Prince’s exit. Malaiyaman who was standing behind him placed his sword before
him as if he too was going to block the Prince’s movement.

Ponniyin Selvan was surprised. And furious. “Commander, are you going to
imprison me?”

“Prince we forbid you from going to the underground prison. If you defy the ban
we won’t think twice to arrest you.” Arulmozhivarman had never heard the
Commander of the Southern Forces talk in that threatening tone.

Ponniyin Selvan did not know whether the old men were serious or were they
just kidding. But he was surely not in a mood to play games with those old men.

“What authority do you have to block me?”

“What authority do you have to release a prisoner from our underground
prison?”

“General, don’t I have the powers? Or have you forgotten who I am? Or have
you forgotten who you are?”

“I have not forgotten either. I am now the Commander of Thanjavur Fort. That
makes me the Chief Guard of the underground prison. You are the Emperor’s
son. Ponniyin Selvan. Even then you don’t have the authority to release
somebody who has been charged with the offence of murdering your brother.
Only the Emperor has that authority now. Or the person who is going to succeed
him will have that authority. You have been proclaiming to everyone that you are
never going to ascend the Chozha Throne. I cannot release anybody from the
prison without orders from the Emperor.”

Malaiyaman was softer.

“My child, what he says is true. As Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar has run away
Emperor has made the Kodumbalur Chieftain the Commander of this Fort. So,
you don’t have the authority to release anybody from the underground prison.”

Ponniyin Selvan did not know how to respond. The room was silent but for the
sobs of Manimekalai.

Chapter 53: Vanathi’s Suggestion

Princess Kunthavai was keenly following the discussion between
Arulmozhivarman and the Chieftains. She came forward to welcome the old
men.

“Thatha! Mama! Why should you discuss such matters at the gates? Why don’t
you come in? I promise you Arulmozhivarman will not go against your word.”

Malaiyaman and the Kodumbalur Chieftain came in. The Kodumbalur Chieftain
spoke to Kunthavai:

“Devi, if only Prince accepts to become the King there will no issues. We will be
waiting at his beck and call ready to give our lives to execute his command.
Emperor wants to be relieved of his responsibilities. He wants to spend his last
days in peace at the golden palace built by Karikalan.”

“Mama, I was making the same request to the Prince before you came in. This
girl came with a plea. The Prince was moved and wanted to go to the prison to
release him.”

“Who is this woman? Why is she crying so much?”

“Can’t you recognise her, Mama? She is Manimekalai, Sambuvaraiyar’s
daughter.”

“Oh, she is distressed because her father is in jail. Stop crying, my child.
Emperor has issued orders to release Sambuvaraiyar. Parthibendran has gone to
the prison to execute the orders.” – Malaiyaman intervened.

“Thatha! She is not worried about her father. She is worried about Vandhiya
Thevan. She wants him out of jail. She says, ‘I killed the Prince; not him’ “Kunthavai.

“Oh! If she is so adamant let’s throw her also in jail. We can’t release the Prince
of Vallam.”- Kodumbalur Chieftain.

Manimekalai spoke to Kunthavai amidst sobs: “That’s my prayer too, Princess.
Ask them to thrown me in jail along with him.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain touched his forehead with his finger and spoke in a soft
voice: “I think this girl has lost her mind.”

Vanathi who had been silent till then erupted:

“Manimekalai has not lost her mind. You and Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman have
lost your minds. Vandhiya Thevan, who is in jail, now, is Ponniyin Selvan’s best
friend. It was he who carried message from the Princess to the Prince who was in
Lanka at that time. He was the one who brought him here. He had won the
confidence of the slain prince Karikalan. Those who have imprisoned him must
have lost their minds. They are all a bunch of mad people.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain’s retort was sharp.

“When did this girl become a chatter-mouth? Vanathi, is this all you learnt from
Princess Kunthavai? Haven’t you learnt to keep your mouth shut when elders are
discussing something serious? You should talk only when you are asked
something. Or else you should keep your mouth shut. Got it?”

Malaiyaman came in to support Vanathi.

“Commander, why are you angry with her? She tells what’s in the mind of these
people.”

Kunthavai came from another angle.

“Yes, Mama. It is not proper either for me or for you to shout at Vanathi. Who
knows, tomorrow she might sit on the Chozha Throne as its Empress. Then we
will have to implicitly obey her orders. Don’t ever forget it, Mama.”

“If Arulmozhi accepts to become the King there is no problem. On the day of
coronation anyhow we are going to release everybody in the underground
prison.” – Malaiyaman.

“Or he can issue orders to throw you, me and everyone outside in the
underground prison” – Kodumbalur Chieftain.

Ponniyin Selvan spoke.

"You are veterans. I am really sad that I have to object; but I don’t have a choice.
This is an emergency. This has to be done right now. And you are talking of
something else.”

Even before he finished the Kodumbalur Chieftain burst out:

“Do you think that settling the issue of succession and to put an end to
unnecessary complications is not an emergency?”

“You seem to have forgotten the fact that Emperor is still alive.”

“We have not forgotten him, Prince. We saw him a few minutes ago. He wants to
settle this issue, crown his successor and retire to the golden palace at Kanchi.”

“Ok, have your way. I am going to meet the Emperor right now. I will get his
orders for the release of Vandhiya Thevan. Once he orders his release, I don’t
think you can object. Right?”

“That’s right, Prince. But it is not right to broach the subject of Vandhiya Thevan
to the Emperor. He thinks that Vandhiya Thevan must have conspired with
Nandini and the personal body guards of Pandya Kingdom and killed
Karikalan.”

“Who poisoned his mind?”

“Definitely not us, Prince. Parthibendran did that.”

“Then I will meet that Pallava Prince. I will ask him what evidence he has
against Vandhiya Thevan. “

“You can’t see him now. Under orders from the Emperor he released
Sambuvaraiyar from jail and has taken him to Kudanthai. They are going to meet
the Pazhuvettaraiyars and the other Chieftains. Emperor has given a message to
them that the issue of succession can be resolved only by deliberations. There is
no need for any conflict. And that he is ready to crown Madhuranthakan.”

Ponniyin Selvan’s face blossomed into a smile. He saw Vanathi and Kunthavai.

“You brought me the first good news for the day.”

“That’s not good news, Prince. That’s bad news not just for us for the whole
Empire. On the day Madhuranthakan ascends the throne against the wishes of
the people and the army, the downfall of this great Chozha Empire, backed by
hundreds of years of pristine glory, will begin.” – Kodumbalur Chieftain.

“There is no doubt about it. There will be mutiny from Lanka in the South to
North Pennai in the north.”

“Looks like you two will lead the mutiny. That is your wish. Meanwhile let me
try to get the Emperor’s orders for the release of my friend, Vandhiya Thevan.”

Arulmozhivarman tried to walk out of the room.

“Prince, please don’t go the Emperor with that plea. That will give rise to
complications. Princess Kunthavai, please stop your brother.”- Kodumbalur
Chieftain.

“Yes, my child. Listen to this old man. I am after all your grandfather.”

“What complications will arise if Arulmozhi pleads for Vandhiya Thevan?”

“Miscreants have floated terrible rumours. I don’t even have the heart to repeat it
in your presence. Two men told our soldiers yesterday : ‘Ponniyin Selvan, out of
his desire to become the next King, hired Vandhiya Thevan to kill Karikalan.’”

“OH MY GOD! HOW CRUEL! WHO HAD THE HEART TO SAY THAT?”

“You know how our soldiers treated those two rumour-mongers? They were
torturing them by ducking them into the Vadalaru River again and again. I went
at the right time to save them.”

Ponniyin Selvan spoke: “Nobody is going to believe this malicious rumour.
Can’t we know it from the reaction of our soldiers?”

“They won’t believe it today, Prince. You don’t know the mind of our people.
The same rumour will spring up again after some time. Then somebody who
does not know you might believe it. In the alien countries killing one’s brothers
for becoming the King is a day to day occurrence. You know the history of
Lanka.”

“General, for the only reason there will be a false rumour some time in the
remote future should I let my dear friend suffer in prison now?”

“Not remote future, Prince. If you show interest in releasing Vandhiya Thevan
people will believe the rumour tomorrow. That may reach the ears of the
Emperor. Just imagine how badly he will be hurt if he hears this.. “

Ponniyin Selvan’s face fell. It resembled the moon covered by dark clouds of
anxiety and grief.

He asked his sister in a helpless tone: “Akka what do you suggest?”

Kunthavai’s beautiful face was lined with grief. She spoke to the Kodumbalur
Chieftain.

“General, who do you think, would have had the heart to spread such a
malignant rumour?”

“Remember the two men whom our soldiers were ducking in and out of the
Vadalaru River? I took the two men aside and asked them. I cajoled them and
even threatened them. Finally they confessed that they were acting on the
instructions of Kandhanmaran.”

Manimekalai came forward.

“I am ashamed of my brother’s cowardly act. He was a good man. But since he
started listening to Nandini’s words he has become like this. I was the one who
killed Adithya Karikalan. Put me in jail. Release Vandhiya Thevan.”

Manimekalai was sobbing.

Princess Kunthavai placed her hand affectionately on Manimekalai’s shoulder.

“Be calm, Manimekalai. Nobody is going to believe you. Your version will only
lead to more rumours. Let us find out a way to resolve this issue.”

She then turned to the Kodumbalur Chieftain:

“General, My brother and I accept your advice. You are right. Trying to release
Vandhiya Thevan now will complicate things and lead to more rumours. We will
have to find out the murderer first. Let me discuss with the Chief Minister. His
disciple Azhwarkkadian has gone in search of the Pandya conspirators. He might
come back with some useful information.

“We don’t know what happened to the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. They may be
found. The truth might come out. I will also try to know what happened in
Kadambur from this girl. Meanwhile make sure that Vandhiya Thevan is
comfortable in jail. I am sure, he is not guilty.”

Vanathi spoke after a long gap.

“I have a flash, Akka.”

“Shoot.”

“Do you remember once we had been to the underground prison? Let’s do it
now. We will all go there and see him. We will take the Kadambur Princess with
us.”

Kunthavai spoke to the Kodumbalur Chieftain.

“What do you think of your daughter’s suggestion?”

“I now know that she too can talk intelligently. Vandhiya Thevan was with
Karikalan on that fateful night in his last moments. We can ask him to describe
the events of that day. Truth may come out.”

Everybody went to the underground prison. Even before the Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar left the Fort he had stopped minting of gold coins. The mint
was silent. There were only a few guards. They crossed the place where the
tigers were caged and walked through the underground passage to reach the cell
where Vandhiya Thevan was held.

But Vandhiya Thevan was not there. In his cell they saw the son of the Chief
Doctor of Pazhaiyaarai, Pinaakapani. He was bound by chains which were
fastened to the iron rings on the wall.

When he saw the visitors he screamed:

“Please let me go. Please free me. I am not guilty. Please.. “

Chapter 54: Pinaakapani’s Feat

The Doctor’s son, Pinaakapani had one great ambition in life: to hold a high post
in the Government. Ever since he met Vandhiya Thevan and travelled with him
to Kodikkarai the yearning for position and power became intense. He was not
successful in the few activities he was involved. It appeared that Nandini had a
soft corner for him. But soon she ignored him. He went to see Princess
Kunthavai with the hope of getting a government assignment which would
eventually land him in a high post. But Kunthavai did not even talk to him let
alone entrust an assignment. At the gates of Pazhaiyaarai Palace Pinaakapani
accused Vandhiya Thevan of being an enemy’s spy. Pinaakapani did not gain
anything from that baseless accusation except that he was beaten up by Vandhiya
Thevan. It still hurt.

There was a sudden turn of events which worked to his advantage. Chief
Minister gave him the crucial assignment of going to Kodikkarai to capture the
Mute Queen. Pinaakapani’s ambition of winning a high post in Governments
was revived. If only he could complete the assignment successfully then he
would be favoured by the Chief Minister. Then sky was the limit. He could get
any post he wanted. His mind was harping on this possibility.

‘If I get the post the first thing I will do is to teach that braggart Vandhiya
Thevan a lesson he should not forget till he dies. Then I will teach humility to
that proud girl Poonkuzhali. I will humiliate her and hold her under my control.’
Well, if only wishes were horses.....

Pinaakapani went to Kodikkarai to capture Mandhakini. Instead of having a clear
plan and a possible Plan B, he went there with a mind laden with fantasies and
wishful thinking. He talked to Rakkammal, Murugaiyyan’s wife, and roped her
in his mission. She too was deceived. She thought that Pinaakapani was a part of

the personal bodyguards of the Pandya King. She discussed their attempts with
him. With her help Pinaakapani could find the Mute Queen and bring her up to
the gates of Thanjavur Fort.

During the journey to Thanjavur his corrupted mind was working overtime. He
tried to unravel the mystery that surrounded the Mute Queen. When he was in
the underground prison a crazy idiot who was his fellow prisoner leaked out
some details about the dumb woman. At that time he thought it was just a babble
of a prisoner who had lost his mind. But when he escorted the woman to
Thanjavur he thought there might be some truth in the words of that crazy idiot.

When the palanquin that bore the Mute Queen approached the gates of the Fort
there were heavy rains. A tree fell on Pinaakapani. He was in bed for some time.
When he was completely healed he sought the audience of the Chief Minister.

By that time so many things had happened. The Mute Queen had sacrificed her
life in order to save the life of the Emperor. Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan
had been killed. The whole country was debating on who was going to be the
next King. The Fort of Thanjavur had come under the control of Kodumbalur
Chieftain. Pazhuvettaraiyars and their friends were mobilising an army. A bloody
civil war was imminent.

Pinaakapani met the Chief Minister when the political atmosphere of the Chozha
Empire was in a state of turbulence. The Chief Minister was submerged in a sea
of worries. He did not want to spend time with Pinaakapani. Since he has done
the Minister’s bidding he wanted to gift him something and dispose him as early
as possible.

But when Pinaakapani started describing the crazy idiot he met in the
underground prison, the Minister’s interest was piqued. When Pinaakapani told

him that the crazy prisoner knew where the ancestral crown of Pandyas and the
opal necklace supposed to have come from the chief of gods were hidden in
Lanka, the Chief Minister sat up in his chair. They have been looking in vain for
that crown and the jewel ever since the time of Emperor Paranthaka. Till these
things are seized somebody would appear every now and then claiming to be a
descendant of Pandyas and would cause confusion in the Chozha Empire.

Azhwarkkadian had told him about the drama enacted at the war memorial at
Thiruppurambayam where a child was crowned as the Pandya King. This kind of
crazy people appeared on the scene quite frequently. When they come up, the
Chera and the Lankan Kings would offer help for them. There would be another
armed conflict. If Madurai had to be made an inseparable part of the Chozha
Empire then whosoever is crowned as the Chozha Emperor should also be
crowned in Madurai. At that time the Chozha Emperor should wear the
traditional Pandya Crown. And the precious opal necklace should adorn the
incumbent.

This had been in the mind of the Chief Minister for quite some time. He told
every Chozha General who went to invade Lanka to look for that crown and the
necklace and if found, carefully bring them back home. No one had succeeded in
that task so far. Now when he learnt that a prisoner in the underground prison
knew about them the Minister was excited.

Pinaakapani also shared another piece of important information with the Chief
Minister. That excited the Minister more and even made him sad. The same mad
man who knew about the Pandya Crown had also told him that he knew a
terrible secret concerning the Chozha Dynasty. The crazy man emphatically said
one of the claimants to the Chozha throne did not belong to the Chozha clan.

At first the Minister wanted to go the underground prison in person and see the
mad man. Then he changed his mind. If he was seen in the prison so many eyebrows will be raised. He will be ruffling some of the strongest feathers in power.

Malaiyaman and the Kodumbalur Chieftain did not trust the Minister completely.
They thought that the Minister supported Madhuranthakan in deference to the
wishes of the Emperor. If the Minister is seen at the prison at this time they
might suspect his intentions. They might think that he went there only to see
Sambuvaraiyar. The Chief Minister wanted to use the Doctor’s son for the job.
He gave his personal signet ring to him and asked him to get more information
from the crazy prisoner.

Accordingly Pinaakapani went to the prison to see the mad man. When he saw
Vandhiya Thevan being incarcerated in the adjacent cell his joy knew no bounds.
He stood at the door of Vandhiya Thevan’s cell and tried to talk to him. Vandhiya
Thevan was in no mood to talk to him.

Pinaakapani ignored him and went to the next cell. It was only then that
Pinaakapani realised that the prisoner was neither crazy nor an idiot. He formally
enquired about the Pandya Crown and the opal necklace. The prisoner became
silent. He also refused to talk about the mystery concerning the Chozha Clan.

“First get my release order. I will tell you everything.”

Pinaakapani came back to the Minister admitting his failure in the mission. He
also told the Minister that if the prisoner was released then they could unearth
valuable information from him. The Minister agreed to the suggestion. In any
case when the country was in a disturbed state it was not prudent to leave
somebody who knew the dangerous secrets in prison. He wanted to bring the
prisoner to his palace and extract the truth from him.

The Chief Minister then met the Commander in Charge of the Fort, the
Kodumbalur Chieftain. He briefed him on the developments. The Commander
did not have any objection to release a person who had been imprisoned by

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar several years ago on the recommendation of the Chief
Minister. The Commander issued written orders to release the prisoner.

Flaunting that order, Pinaakapani entered the prison once again. At first he stood
at the entrance of Vandhiya Thevan’s cell. ‘ I have got orders for your release.’
Pinaakapani teased Vandhiya Thevan.

The latter thought it was true and started thanking the Doctor’s son profusely. It
was only then Pinaakapani revealed his true colours. He used harsh words to
condemn Vandhiya Thevan and finally cursed him, “Your release will happen
only on the road junction where you will be impaled. I mean the release of life
from your body - not your release from this prison. Forget it.”

Pinaakapani then went to the next cell and started a friendly conversation with
the crazy prisoner. He released him from the chains that bound him to the wall.

“Here I have procured your release. Will you share your secrets at least now?”

Pinaakapani wanted to know the secrets himself before the prisoner was taken to
the Minister.

But the prisoner was not very enthusiastic about his release. He was not in a
hurry to go. He did not trust Pinaakapani.

“What? Who gave the orders? Can I get out of these dungeons for sure? Will
they let me go out of the Fort?”

Suddenly some stones got disengaged from the nearby wall and fell down.
Pinaakapani turned around to look. He saw Vandhiya Thevan standing behind
him. Pinaakapani took out the knife from his waist. Vandhiya Thevan sprang on
him. His hand circled his neck. The other hand pushed the knife down to the
floor.

The two men rolled on the floor. The crazy prisoner lifted a chain hanging on the
wall and threw it on Pinaakapani’s neck. He tried to strangulate him with that
heavy iron chain.

Chapter 55: The Mad Man

During the gruelling journey from Kadambur to Thanjavur as part of the slain
Crown Prince’s funeral procession Vandhiya Thevan was mostly unconscious.
He was bound to a cart and carried along. On the night of Karikalan’s death the
smoke and the fire at the Kadambur Palace had completely exhausted him.
Whenever he became conscious during the journey he was tormented by the
irritation in his eyes and the dull ache all over his body. When he was semiconscious many scary scenes appeared to him as if in a vision.

Veerapandiyan’s severed head came very close to his face to threaten him, “You
stood in the way of my revenge. How dare you!” The eyes in the severed head
emitted fire. At times Nandini appeared before him wearing the finest silks and
bedecked with gold and diamonds. Then the same Nandini appeared like a ghost
in a wrinkled dress and dishevelled hair with a scary laugh. A shadowy figure
armed with a sharp knife was trailing Adithya Karikalan. Whenever Vandhiya
Thevan sprang on that shadowy figure to frustrate its motives another strong
figure held Vandhiya Thevan from behind and tried to strangulate him.
Ravidasan and his friends threw Vandhiya Thevan in fire. When his body was in
flames Kandhanmaran whispered in his ears, “Betrayer! Traitor, you deserve
this and much more.”

Parthibendran stung him with his sharp words. “Looks like you are now engaged
to Princess Kunthavai. When is the wedding, Prince?” The Pallava Prince’s
laugh ripped all sense of shame from Vandhiya Thevan’s heart.

Chendan Amudhan came running from nowhere to rescue Vandhiya Thevan
from the burning fire. The Doctor’s son, Pinaakapani, who was hiding behind a
tree hit Amudhan with a thick stick.

When his body was being consumed by fire Vandhiya Thevan was extremely
thirsty. He wanted to scream for water. But no sound came out of his mouth. His
parched tongue got stuck to his upper jaw forcing him into a helpless silence. At
this time Manimekalai came near him with a golden bowl which contained the
elixir of life. She poured the liquid gently in his mouth. Before Vandhiya Thevan
could thank her adequately she vanished.

‘Even if I were to place all the three worlds at the feet of this girl it won’t be
enough. But when I don’t even own one square inch of land to think of giving the
three worlds to Manimekalai is sheer foolishness.

Who do I see there? Yes, it’s Poonkuzhali. She is pointing out to the fire-mouthed
ghosts. ‘See my lovers’ she screams. What a strange girl!

‘Why are you suffering in this world made of sand? I will take you the world
made of gold.’

‘You mean to the world of Ponniyin Selvan?’

At that time they were surrounded by fire-mouthed ghosts. Vandhiya Thevan
closed his eyes in fear. The ghosts carried him to the sand dunes of Kodikkarai
and pushed him down from the top.

Vandhiya Thevan woke up with a start. He realised that he had been lifted to a
boat by men holding bright torches. He did not know what river it was. Should
be Coleroon or Cauvery. Or perhaps River Kudamurutti. Darkness closed in on

him. His mind was shrouded in darkness too.

After a series of strange experiences at last he heard a sound of the seven seas
trying to breach the shores. A big wave hit him and drowned him. Vandhiya
Thevan was fully conscious now. He opened his eyes and looked around. A little
away before him was the entrance of the Thanjavur Fort. There were people
around the cart to which he was secured. The wailing sound coming from people
resembled the roar of a mighty ocean in turbulence. He knew that the funeral
procession of Adithya Karikalan had reached Thanjavur and that explained the
crowds and their wailing.

A little later the crowd left him. Vandhiya Thevan and Sambuvaraiyar were
accompanied by a few guards and led into the Fort. Vandhiya Thevan was
terribly upset. He could not take part in the funeral of his dear friend and the
best warrior the Empire had ever seen. He blamed it on his stars. He almost gave
his life to save that of the Crown Prince. He spared no pain to succeed in the
mission entrusted to him by Princess Kunthavai. But he failed. And to add insult
to injury he was charged with murder.

Vandhiya Thevan, as a single man, without any help from anybody made sure
that Karikalan’s body was not burnt in the general fire that ravaged the
Kadambur Palace soon after his death. It was because of him that the Chozha
country could give a state funeral befitting the stature of her valiant son, Adithya
Karikalan. And what reward he got for his heroic efforts? He was being dragged
into the prison meant for murderers, robbers and political conspirators.

Let them have their way. Ponniyin Selvan and Princess Kunthavai will surely ask
about him. When they know that I am jailed they will panic. They will come
running here with the keys to the prison. They will release me. Though I failed in
my duty to save Karikalan they will praise me for my efforts.

But will they? Will they think of me? They have lost their brother. Will they have
the time or inclination to think of anything else? Will they wait for me to deny the
charge? Will they believe me only after I issue a statement of denial? Even If
they believe me to be innocent will the relationship be same as it was before?

As he was being taken to the prison through the Chozha mint hope was slowly
ebbing out of his mind. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had closed the mint some time
ago. They were only a few guards scattered on the way. They did not bear the
palm tree insignia. Kodumbalur Chieftain had replaced all the old guards with
his own men.

The guards stared at the two new prisoners. They whispered among themselves.

‘This one is Sambuvaraiyar. And that is Vandhiya Thevan, the one who killed
the Crown Prince.’

Vandhiya Thevan’s heart bled as he heard those words. He saw the caged tigers
on the way. They were the appropriate emblems of the valour of the Chozha
clan.

The guards took him further down and locked him a separate cell. When the
guards left the place Vandhiya Thevan had lost all hopes. He was sure that he
was not going to be freed from the prison. Probably after he died there in the
prison they would take his body out of the underground dungeons.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar never had any good opinion about him. Parthibendran
hated him. The old Malaiyaman believes only in the words of Parthibendran.
Pazhuvettaraiyars would plead for Sambuvaraiyar and secure his release. Who

was going to plead for him? No one. He would be charged with the grave
offence of murdering the Crown Prince. Would they hold a public enquiry?
Probably. He would be given an opportunity of being heard. He would be given
a chance to prove his innocence. He would tell the truth. Nothing but the truth,
the whole of it.

No, no. There would not be any enquiry. If there was an enquiry the truth about
Nandini and the Ravidasan gang might come out in the open. Nobody would
relish that. There would not be any enquiry. They would simply let him rot in the
underground prison. Or else, they may condemn him without enquiry and impale
him on a road junction.

God! When he left for Thanjavur for the first time his mind was bubbling with
youthful enthusiasm. He had several dreams. Especially after meeting Princess
Kunthavai and Vanathi at the Kudanthai Astrologer’s place he had been floating
in an ocean of happiness. With his heart soaked in happiness he set foot inside
the Thanjavur Fort. At that time he was afraid that the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar
might denounce him as a spy and throw him into the underground prison. That
has now become true in another way. His life so far was like a bird flying on the
high skies. Now he was locked up in the dark prison chambers. How long could
he be confined in this godforsaken place?

‘No, no. I can’t stay here all my life. I will rather kill myself.’

Vandhiya Thevan sat like a statue inside his cell longing for either freedom or if
that was not possible at least a painless death.

He heard somebody singing in the adjacent cell.

“Lord Shiva, whose body is of the golden hue.. “

It was a song from Devaram. Vandhiya Thevan was immediately reminded of
Chendan Amudhan. But it was not Chendan Amudhan who sang now.
Amudhan’s voice had a divine sweetness. This voice as awfully bad. But why
should a man in the underground cell sing that song? Quite unusual.

Vandhiya Thevan could not bear that horrible sound even for few seconds. As if
being confined in prison was not enough, there was this additional punishment –
of hearing the prisoner’s attempt at singing which was distractingly off-key.

“Who is there?” Vandhiya Thevan shouted.

“It’s me, the mad man.”

“My dear mad man. Have mercy on me. Please stop singing.”

“Why? You don’t like my song?”

“ Who said? I love it.”

“You love my song. And yet you want me to stop singing. Beautiful”

“You don’t look like a mad man to me? Who taught you this song?”

“Some time back there was a man in your cell. He stayed here for a few days. He
was singing this song all the time. I got it by heart.”

Vandhiya Thevan immediately knew that the person referred to was Chendan
Amudhan. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had imprisoned him for a few days for the
grave offence of helping Vandhiya Thevan escape from his men. Vandhiya
Thevan had heard about that. So this mad man must be referring to Chendan
Amudhan.

Chendan Amudhan. Sweet man! And a real friend!

“Who stayed in this cell for a few days? Do you know him?”

“Why not? His name is Chendan Amudhan. He is the son of some dumb woman.
If only the world knows his real identity.. .. “

“What will happen?”

“The world will turn upside down.”

“If it did, will we be released from this hell?”

“Definitely.”

“Then please tell me who he is.”

“No I won’t. How can I so easily part with such crucial information? I will tell
only in the ears of our Emperor. Is Sundara Chozhan still the Emperor?”

“Yes. Why do you ask?”

“A few days back some changes happened here. The old guards are gone. New
ones have come. The mint has been closed. When it was working we used to
hear the sound constantly.”

“Why did they close the mint? Why were the guards changed?”

“Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar abandoned the Fort and has fled from Thanjavur.
Kodumbalur Chieftain has captured the Fort. I got to know from the guards.”

“Oh, is that so?”

Vandhiya Thevan was really surprised.

Kodumbalur Chieftain Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari knew Vandhiya Thevan very

well. In fact he had tested him. Would he believe his words and free him? How
could he do it? Who could free a man accused of killing the Crown Prince?

“Why brother, you have suddenly become silent? Shall I start singing again?”

“No, no. I was thinking about what you said. You said that Chendan Amudhan is
not the son of that dumb woman? Then who is he?”

“Let’s discuss something else.”

“Why do you call yourself a mad man?”

“Because everybody who comes here calls me so.”

“Why should they do that?”

“I know the place where the Pandya’s ancestral crown and the opal necklace
gifted by the chief of gods is hidden in Lanka. I have been telling everyone that
if I am freed I will show the place. They call me a mad man.”

“Those who call you mad are mad.”

“Do you believe my words”?”

“Completely. But what is the use of my believing your words? I too am a
prisoner like you. I can’t help you in any way.”

“Don’t lose hopes. Whosoever is locked up in the room you are staying now get
released pretty soon. You are in a lucky cell. At least that has been the practice
for some time. “

“What practice? Come on. Give me examples.”

“Once the son of a Doctor, whose name was Pinaakapani was locked up in that
room. The Pazhuvur Queen came personally to release him. Chendan Amudhan
too was locked up in that room. Princess Kunthavai and the Kodumbalur
Princess came to release him.”

Vandhiya Thevan let out a long sigh.

“No queen or princess will ever come to free me.”

“So what? I will release you.”

“Only now you are talking like a mad man.”

“No. Trust me.”

“I have no other choice. I have to believe you.”

“Then wait patiently till the guards come and give us our dinner.”

The words came from a person popularly known as a mad man.

Chapter 56: ‘Sanjeevani Herb’

The guards had completed their last routine rounds for the day. The underground
prison was absolutely silent. Vandhiya Thevan was eagerly waiting for the call
from the mad man. He heard the sound of a rat scratching the wall. Vandhiya
Thevan was not afraid of lions and tigers; but he was mortally afraid of cats and
rats. He was worried about spending the whole night in that rat-infested
dungeon.

Vandhiya Thevan called.

“Mad man, have you slept already?”

There was no response from the adjacent cell. The rat-scratching continued.

After some time some stones got dislodged from the wall and fell on the floor. A

hole was formed.

“Brother, have you slept already?” – The mad man called Vandhiya Thevan.

“I have not. Waiting for you. What is this?”

“This is the fruit of my six months’ hard work. Before doing this I spent six
months to free myself from the chains that bind my hand.”

After a few minutes the hole became larger and the mad man entered Vandhiya
Thevan’s cell.

Vandhiya Thevan held his hand and helped him get down.

“What is the use of making a hole in this wall? You should have done it on the
outside wall. That would have been useful.”

“There is no outer wall for this underground prison. We can go only through the
room where the tigers are kept. Your room used to be vacant most of the time.
On such occasions it won’t be locked. So it is easier to escape from your room
than mine.”

“You saw me only today. Why did you tell everything to me? What if I betray
you to the wardens?”

“I can find out who should be trusted and who should not by merely by hearing
his voice. I will trust Chendan Amudhan but not Pinaakapani. I heard your voice
and decided that I can trust you. Now is the only time to escape from jail. Either
it is now or never.”

“Why do you say that?”

“Didn’t I tell you that the guards have changed? I overheard a conversation
between the new guards. They were talking about opening the tigers’ cage. One
of them asked, ‘When we open the doors of the cage what if the tigers pounce on
us?’

‘We will have to just die’, replied the other. From this we can safely infer that
they do not open the tigers’ cage these days. Since they are new guards we can
spring a surprise on them and before they realise what’s happening we can get
away from the prison. Whatever may be the risks involved it is better to make an
attempt than rot to death in this hell.”

“True.”

“It is better to work as a team of two. I have been here for some time. But you
are quite new. I am weak; but you are very strong. We can attack two guards
together, tie them up here, retrieve the keys from them and run away.”

“Brilliant. When can we leave?”

“Patience, brother, patience. That’s the buzzword. I am waiting for the right
time.”

“I too am exhausted. Even if the escape is delayed by a day or two, it does not
matter.”

The mad man was talking to Vandhiya Thevan for a long time. He came to know
what happened in the outside world when he was in prison. When he learnt
about the death of Adithya Karikalan he almost cried: “Then it is all the more
important that I should get out right now.”

“Why do you say that?”

“Somebody has to be made a Crown Prince in his place, right?”

“Why Crown Prince? That somebody will be directly crowned as the Emperor.
The Emperor is sick and grief-stricken now. He wants to get away from
everything.”

“Who is going to be crowned? What does the grapevine say?”

“Some chieftains prefer Madhuranthakan. Others prefer Ponniyin Selvan.”

“What is in the Emperor’s mind?”

“He wants to avoid an internal conflict at any cost. And he wants to crown
Madhuranthakan precisely for that reason.”

“Then it is extremely important that we two should get away from here
immediately.”

The mad man then explained how he came to know about the Pandya Crown and
the opal necklace. Vandhiya Thevan asked about the mystery connected to the
Chozha clan.

“I won’t tell that now. If we both survive our escape attempt I will share that
secret with you. If not let the secret die with me.”

Vandhiya Thevan was lost in thoughts.

When Vandhiya Thevan suddenly saw Pinaakapani he was startled. He was
afraid that the braggart might hinder their grand escape plan. He did not believe
Pinaakapani’s clever words. Vandhiya Thevan and the mad man thought alike
when it came to Pinaakapani. They both knew that Pinaakapani had come there
with some evil intentions. They took a vow that one would not leave the other
and go out of prison.

So when Pinaakapani came for the second time armed with the Minister’s signet
ring the two men were extremely careful. The Doctor’s son showed the signet

ring to the mad man and demanded that he should reveal the secrets to him.
Vandhiya Thevan now entered the adjacent cell through the hole made in the
wall by the mad man. Pinaakapani turned around to attack him. A duel followed.
In any other time Vandhiya Thevan would have crushed him to defeat in a few
seconds. But now Vandhiya Thevan’s burns had not fully healed. Because the
Kalamuka had strangulated his neck he still had pain in his throat. The duel
continued for some time. The mad man strangulated Pinaakapani’s neck an iron
chain. Pinaakapani fell down.

Then the two men lifted him up and bound him to the iron rings embedded in the
wall with the iron chain. When they were tying up Pinaakapani Vandhiya
Thevan was at his mischievous best.

“My dear friend Pinaakapani, do you remember that once we two went to Lanka
in search of the famous Sanjeevani herb to treat our Emperor? We did not bring
back those Sanjeevani herbs. But you came here as the life-giving Sanjeevani
herb for both of us. Thanks a lot, my friend for the timely help. You are a
Doctor’s son. Confine your activities to the field of medicine. Why do you poke
your nose in the dangerous work of espionage and hurt yourself?”

Pinaakapani was too shocked to respond. His eyes emitted fire. They could see it
in the light of the burning torch he had brought with him. The two men seized
the Minister’s signet ring from Pinaakapani. Vandhiya Thevan removed
Pinaakapani’s head gear and adorned himself with it.

They came out of the cell and locked its door. They walked up the steps slowly.
They did not know the way; so they were very low. The heard the grunting
sound of the tigers. They were hesitant. The guards might have known their
escape plan and might have let loose the tigers!

Vandhiya Thevan and the mad man peered into the tigers’ room. There was a
single guard in that room. He was staring at the caged tiger. Was he planning to
open the cage and let the tiger have a go at the two escapees?

The Doctor’s son started to scream. The scream must have alerted the guard.

Vandhiya Thevan though that it was a great mistake not to have gagged
Pinaakapani.

Chapter 57: Freedom At Last

Vandhiya Thevan hesitated at the door of the hall where tigers were caged. The
guard posted in that hall was looking at the tigers in the cage, while twirling his
moustache. Vandhiya Thevan first thought of springing on the guard, kill him
and go forward. But there were two more guards on the steps on the other side of
the hall. One of those guards gave a signal to the guard in the tiger hall and
moved away. Were they discussing about their escape and planning a counteraction? If Vandhiya Thevan hit this guard and move on there will be more doors,
more steps and more guards on those steps. It was impossible even for a warrior
like Vandhiya Thevan to overcome all the guards.

A more viable alternative was to spring to the cage and open its doors. In the
resulting confusion and melee it was easy to escape from the prison.

“So, you are planning to escape?”- Vandhiya Thevan was startled by these words
coming from the guard.

One of the tigers roared.

“Shut up, you useless dog!” The guard shouted at the jungle cat.

Now Vandhiya Thevan knew that the guard was talking to the tiger. Vandhiya
Thevan laughed. The guard turned around.

“See this sir, the tiger is trying to frighten me. I have seen hundreds of tigers like
this. The tricks of this bloody tiger won’t work with this majestic lion.”

The guard pointed to himself and twirled his moustache again.

Vandhiya Thevan responded in the same tone.

“So long as it is caged a tiger and a mouse are the same. How can it frighten
you?”

Vandhiya Thevan casually flaunted the official seal of Kodumbalur Chieftain.

“You may go. The Chief Minister’s men are waiting for you at the gates. Go
fast.” The guard then turned to the mad man.

“Won’t you keep quiet, you mad man?”

Vandhiya Thevan was holding the hand of the mad man. He could feel it was
trembling in fear. Vandhiya Thevan tightened his grip to calm his mind.

They went past the guard.

“Release! They want release! If everybody is released what can we do for our

living?” Vandhiya Thevan heard these words. He was a very bold man by nature.
Even then his heart beat went up.

He remembered the guard’s words that the Chief Minister’s men were waiting
outside. It was pretty dark inside the prison. So it was easy to hoodwink the
guards. But outside the prison there would be sufficient light. It was early in the
evening. What if the Chief Minister’s men detected this impersonation? He
decided to face the danger. He should be prepared for any contingency. After all
the mad man was really very smart. He would help in case of need.

They crossed several doors, entrances and steps. Then they went past the mint.
The guards on the way saw the official seal of the Kodumbalur Chieftain, stood
aside to let them pass. As they were walking along the corridor a plan was
forming inside Vandhiya Thevan’s mind. When they were going in a long room
which did not have any guard Vandhiya Thevan whispered to the mad man. “Do
you want to go to the Chief Minister’s house or come with me?”

“If I go to the Chief Minister’s house now I will be back to the underground
prison in a jiffy. I would rather come with you. But where are you going?”

“If God wills so, we can even go to Srilanka. Call me Pinaakapani in the
presence of the Chief Minister’s men. What is your name?”

“Mad man.”

“Sweet name. What name did your parents give you?”

“Oh, you mean that? I was named Karia Thirumal. People used to call me
Karuthiruman.”

“Good name. Karuthiruma, when we walk in the streets of Thanjavur I will
touch your shoulder. That is a signal. You should be prepared to run with me.
Can you run fast?”

“I can. Even the defeated Lankan King, Mahindan, cannot compete with me in a
running race.”

Vandhiya Thevan smiled. “You are a good mad man.”

They now came out of the prison. Vandhiya Thevan was afraid that there would
be many men waiting for them. But there were only two. One of them was stout.
Vandhiya Thevan remembered seeing him somewhere. He could not remember.

“Are you the Chief Minister’s men?”

“What, Thambi? Have you forgotten us so fast?” – One of them retorted.

“No, no. I asked you whether you are going to take us to the Chief Minister’s
place.”

“Yes, we are the ones. You might have forgotten the way. We are there just in
case.”

Karuthiruman remembered the words of Vandhiya Thevan and spoke to him in a
loud voice.

“Pinaakapani, I am afraid. Will the Chief Minister send me to jail again?”

One of the Chief Minister’s men replied.

“No, he won’t. You don’t know about our Chief Minister. But don’t ever try to
escape. If you did then we will be thrown in jail.”

The solemn procession started from the gates of the prison. The stout man
walked in the front. He was followed by Vandhiya Thevan and Karuthiruman.
Another man came behind them.

The streets of Thanjavur were deserted. After Karikalan’s funeral people inside
the Fort were immersed in their work. The Kodumbalur Army was on guard
outside the Fort. Nobody from outside was allowed to enter the Fort. Vandhiya
Thevan was keenly observing both the sides of the road as he walked along. It
was easy to escape from the two Chief Minister’s men. But the real problem is
getting out of the Fort. They were likely to be caught again. Vandhiya Thevan
was carefully scoring both the sides of the road exploring the possibilities of
getting out of the Fort.

Vandhiya Thevan was excited when they crossed the palace of Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. Next to the palace was that alley. On an earlier occasion when
the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men were closing in on Vandhiya Thevan he

escaped through this alley. Vandhiya Thevan had been looking for this alley.
There were many twists and turns in that alley. On both the sides of that alley
were garden-walls. Above the wall were low lying branches of trees. If they
escaped from the Chief Minister’s men now they could use the trees and get into
the garden of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace. They could hide themselves in
the dense foliage. And as he did earlier they could escape through the
subterranean passage that went through the underground treasury. There was no
other way to escape.

They reached the alley. That was the one. Either now or never. Vandhiya Thevan
was about to touch Karuthiruman’s shoulder.

Oh My God! What was happening? There was a large crowd. He could see
horses, palanquins and soldiers armed with long spears. Why do they come with
so much fanfare. Perhaps members of the King’s family or some high ranking
officials must be passing by.

The Chief Minister’s men were also distracted by the ruckus. They looked
around. They saw the regal paraphernalia. They moved away from the road.
They kept the two men behind them and stood to attention hiding them.

The crowd passed that place. There were a few armed guards in the front. They
were followed by three men in majestic Arabian steeds. There was Malaiyaman
and the Kodumbalur Chieftain. Another handsome man rode between the two.
Vandhiya Thevan recognised Ponniyin Selvan.

‘Oh My God! He is so near and yet so far.’

Can I defy the guards and appear before him?

Then he changed his mind. How could Ponniyin Selvan show mercy to
somebody who was charged of killing his brother. How could he be friends with
somebody who killed his own brother? Ponniyin Selvan might be disgusted with
Vandhiya Thevan. Nobody can guess how Malaiyaman and the Kodumbalur
Chieftain would handle him. Vandhiya Thevan looked at the palanquins that
came behind the horses. Princess Kunthavai, Kodumbalur, Princess Vanathi and
Kadambur Princess Manimekalai. Vandhiya Thevan’s heart skipped a beat.

In any other situation he would have sought the help of any of the three women.
They would love to help him. But now? Kunthavai and Vanathi might detest the
traitor who murdered Karikalan.

But why that silly girl Manimekalai was with them? In a way that made
Vandhiya Thevan happy. The girl might have told what happened in the
Kadambur Palace. She had been telling “I killed Karikalan” to save Vandhiya
Thevan. Would she have told the same to the Princess? She could not have. For
if she had done that they would not take her like this, with care and concern.

The palanquins went past them followed by armed guards in the rear.

“Come let’s go. It’s getting late.”

The Chief Minister’s men walked in front. It took just a second for Vandhiya
Thevan to decide that it was the right time. There was no rear guard now. He
touched Karuthiruman’s shoulder and started to run in the alley. Karuthiruman
followed him.

They heard the men running behind them. They did not look back. After some
time Karuthiruman looked back and announced.

“One has stayed back. Only one man is following us.”

Vandhiya Thevan turned around to see. Even if it was just one man it would not
be wise to fight with him. He signalled to Karuthiruman and started running
faster. Karuthiruman followed.

Vandhiya Thevan stopped at the place from where he got into the
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace earlier. The lowered branch of the tree was still there.
Vandhiya Thevan got hold of it and climbed the wall. He then helped
Karuthiruman climb up the wall. Then they shook the broken branch and severed
it from the tree. When the man who followed them came near the tree they threw
the branch on him. They did not care to check whether the branch hit its target.
They jumped down on the other side and walked through tall trees and thick
bushes. They hid themselves and watched the wall. They made sure that nobody
jumped inside the wall. They then walked ahead.

“Thank God, we are saved. And we are free.”- Vandhiya Thevan.

“It is too early to say that. How can we get out of the Fort?”

“There is a way, friend. Be patient. Patience is the need of the hour, my friend.”

When they came near Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace Vandhiya Thevan stopped. The
palace was not what it used to be. It was no longer a happening place. It was
practically deserted but for a few guards and workers scattered over the place.
Vandhiya Thevan decided that it would be prudent to wait till night to get into
the underground treasury.

Vandhiya Thevan sat on a log. He made Karuthiruman sit by his side.

“We can resume our journey only when it is dark. Till then I want to listen to
your story.”

“I can’t tell you anything till we are completely free.”

“Then I can’t take you out.”

“What if tell you a false story, something out of my imagination?”

“I want to while away the time. So I don’t care whether your story is true or
false, so long as it is good.”

Karuthiruman started a long narration. It seemed like a work of fiction of a
creative writer with many unexpected twists and turns.

Chapter 58: Karuthiruman’s Story

Karia Thirumal also known as Karuthiruman belonged to the town called
Thopputhurai north of Kodikkarai. He earned his livelihood by ferrying
passengers to and from Srilanka.

About twenty five years ago once when he was returning to his place from
Lanka, there was a terrible storm in the sea. He had to struggle to keep his small
boat afloat in the mighty ocean. As he was near the shore he saw a woman
floating in water. He took her in his boat. She was unconscious. He could not
find out whether she was alive or not. He could not get his boat to the shore. He
sailed along with the wind and finally reached the shore in a place called
Thirumaraikkadu. He dragged the unconscious woman to the shore. He was
worried about her. At that time a few men came riding on horses.

The woman did not talk. It appeared that she did not have the sense of hearing.
One of the horsemen told him that the woman was born deaf and dumb. The man
who appeared to be their leader took him away and spoke to him in a whisper.
He requested Karuthiruman to leave the lady somewhere on the Lankan shores
after the storm subsided. And that he would give him loads of money for that
service. Karuthiruman accepted the assignment and got the money from him.

When the storm receded he took the girl in his boat and rowed back to Srilanka.
He saw a man clinging to a log on the high seas. The man appeared exhausted
and was losing his struggle for his life. Karuthiruman rescued him and took him
also in his boat to Srilanka. At the first the woman was scared by the stranger.
Then she ignored him. Karuthiruman dropped them at an island near Srilanka.

There was an old man living in that island. He told Karuthiruman that the
woman was his daughter. He also told him that she was born dumb and she had
lost her mind and could not even recognise her own father. Karuthiruman told
him about how he rescued her from the sea.

Meanwhile the man whom Karuthiruman rescued from the sea gave a palm leaf
to him and requested him to deliver it to the King of Lanka. Karuthiruman now
knew that he had rescued a very important person. While delivering the message
to the Lankan King Karuthiruman discovered that the man he had rescued was
the Pandya King.

The Lankan King sent his men to bring home the Pandya King. Karuthiruman
was tired and hence he did not go with those men. The Pandya King arrived at
the Lankan Palace after a few days. The two Kings then moved over to the hilly
Rohana country at the southern tip of Lanka. They stayed there for a few days.

This time the Pandya King out of his love for Karuthiruman took him along in
the trip. The Lankan King showed so many interesting places to the Pandya
King in the Rohana Country. Finally he took him to a valley which nobody could
approach. There in a cave there were mounds and mounds of gold coins,
priceless gems and diamonds. After seeing them all the Lankan King opened a
golden box and showed it to the Pandya King. Inside the box were a shining
crown and an opal necklace.

Karuthiruman knew from the conversation between the kings that the crown was
the ancestral crown of Pandya Kingdom and the opal necklace was the one
which came from the chief of gods. The Lankan King asked the Pandya King to
take back those treasures with him. The Pandya King refused. The Pandya King
said that one day he would destroy the entire Chozha Clan and would be
crowned as the Emperor in Madurai. The Lankan King should come to Madurai
to give the crown and the jewel publicly at the coronation function.

The Pandya King then gave as much gold coins as Karuthiruman could carry. He
requested him to make arrangements for providing care to that dumb woman.
Then he could join him in the Pandya Kingdom.

When Karuthiruman went back to the Ghost Island he could not see the mute
woman. Her father was also not to be found. He went to Kodikkarai in search of
them. There he saw the woman. But she did not recognise him. Karuthiruman
collected some information from the woman’s house. Her father had become
sick. He brought her to Kodikkarai. Soon thereafter the father died. The
caretaker of the light house was her brother. At first she suffered from total
amnesia and could not recognise even her father, brother or her sister. But when
she fell down again she remembered everything. Others came to know that she
was pregnant. She was terrified of this development. She frequented the
Kuzhakar Temple at Kodikkarai and served the Lord. Karuthiruman tried hard;
but she did not recognise him.

While he was in Kodikkarai he met the sister of that mute woman. He found out
that she too was dumb like her sister. He took pity on her. He wanted to marry
her. Before that he wanted to meet his benefactor, the Pandya King and tell him
about his marriage. It was during this time that the Chozha Empress, the wife of
the saintly Emperor Kandaraathithar visited the Kuzhakar Temple. She saw the
mute girl Mandhakini and took her to the Palace. Mandhakini’s sister Vani also
tagged along.

Karuthiruman went to the Pandya Kingdom. He learnt that the Pandya King had
gone to the battlefield. He went to the warfront and met the King there. The
King gave him a message to be delivered to the Lankan King. The Pandya King
also requested him to make one more attempt to bring the mute woman to him.

Karuthiruman delivered the message to the Lankan King and went to

Pazhaiyaarai. He could not forget Vani, Mandhakini’s sister. He went to
Pazhaiyaarai mainly to meet her and if possible marry her.

Karuthiruman was approaching Pazhaiyaarai along the banks of River
Arasalaaru. He saw a woman digging a pit. That was all right. But when he saw
a small cloth bundle by her side and when he heard the voice of a child crying,
he was terrified.

He wanted to know what kind of an evil woman was trying to bury a child alive.
His mind was filled with fury and disgust when he approached her. The woman
looked up. Karuthiruman recognised the woman he loved – Vani.

"Imagine my plight, Thambi. How would I have felt at that time? You can’t even
make a guess.”

“I am not going to hazard a guess now. You continue with the story.”

“No, I can’t tell any further. I will tell the rest of the story only to somebody
from the King’s family. If only I had not been to Pazhaiyaarai at that time I
would have been saved from lot of trouble.”

“Then let’s start now. Let’s tell this story to somebody in the Royal household.”

Vandhiya Thevan smiled. Darkness had crept in by now.

Vandhiya Thevan and Karuthiruman approached the underground treasury. There
was nobody there at that time. The doors of the treasury were secured by a huge
lock. But when Vandhiya Thevan pressed against an almost invisible small door,
it opened. They went in and bolted the door from inside.

Vandhiya Thevan entered the place were gold, diamonds, pearls and gems were
kept in heaps.

“Is the treasure at the Rohana country cave as great as this?”

“A hundred times greater than this.”

Vandhiya Thevan grabbed a few gold coins and secured them in his waist band.
They resumed their journey. Vandhiya Thevan led the way. He opened the secret
door on the wall. There was no guard in that place. He stuck out his head and
looked on all sides. Vadavaaru was full. Water flowed very fast touching the
edges of both the banks. Vandhiya Thevan could see the light of torches at a
distance.

After making sure that there was nobody in the vicinity Vandhiya Thevan
stepped out. Karuthiruman followed him closing the door behind him. Vandhiya
Thevan was exploring the ways to cross the River and reach the other side. He
saw a boat caught in the tangled roots of a tree on the bank.

Chapter 59: Bad Omen

Vandhiya Thevan saw the boat caught in the tangled tree-roots. He thought that
the Goddess of Luck had come back to his side once again. He became excited.
Vandhiya Thevan could not row. But his companion Karuthiruman had been
rowing all his life. If they pushed the boat along the Vadavaaru River the force of
water would taken them half way to Kodikkarai.

“See, Karuthiruma, this boat has not sunk in the river. It is still floating and
waiting for us. If you display your rowing skills we can cross half the distance
before morning. Then even the King’s horsemen cannot reach us.”

Karuthiruman looked around. He had his doubts. He was not comfortable. On
the river bank near the roots of the tree alongside the wall, he sensed some
movement in the bushes. Karuthiruman threw a small stone in the bushes. A cat
sprang from the bushes and got into the boat.

Vandhiya Thevan laughed.

“You are more courageous than me.” Vandhiya Thevan was sarcastic.

He threw another stone into the boat. The cat sprang from the boat, came
towards them and ran between them.

Vandhiya Thevan was startled. He moved two steps back.

“You are no better, Thambi.” It was Karuthiruman’s turn to laugh.

“I dread cats. If a cat comes in contact it with me it would be a hair-rising
experience for me. But that’s all right. Now that the cat has gone away, we can
go.”

“Wait, brother. I am not afraid of a cat falling on me. But if a cat crosses me, if it
goes in between two persons, that is a bad omen.”

“What is this omen and all? Sheer nonsense.”

Vandhiya Thevan grabbed Karuthiruman’s hand and dragged him to the boat.
Karuthiruman moved to one end of the boat and tried to push it in water. No
sooner than the boat moved, four men sprang into the boat. Two of them sprang
on Vandhiya Thevan, pushed him to the floor of the boat and bound him to the
planks. The other two, armed with spears, went to Karuthiruman and stood on
his either side blocking all his escape routes.

The one who appeared as their leader was the stout man who followed them
from the underground prison. Vandhiya Thevan was surprised that he made it so
fast to the entrance of the underground passage and waited for them with a boat.
Vandhiya Thevan knew that he was no ordinary guard. He should be a seasoned
spy. Whosoever he might be Vandhiya Thevan clearly remembered seeing him
somewhere.

The stout man talked to Karuthiruman. “You have been in jail for several years.

You were released just now. Why did you listen to this crook and try to run
away? That is all right. I don’t have the heart to bind you with ropes. If you
listen to me you will be saved. Or else you had it.”

“As you please, Sir. The Chief Minister wanted to have me released. But I
listened to this fool and spoilt my chances. From now on I will obey you. Please
don’t send me back to the underground prison.”

“The Chief Minister wants to know some things from you. If you tell the truth, if
tell what all you know you won’t be sent back to the underground prison. On the
other hand you will be loaded with gold and other gifts and sent away to lead a
free and happy life. Where were you planning to go?”

“To Srilanka.”

“Wonderful. Do you think that you can go that far, hoodwinking the Chief
Minister and the Commander-in-charge of the Fort, the Kodumbalur Chieftain?
But this ruffian is capable of giving such impractical advice. Once he escaped
from Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s guards. Let’s discuss that later. Now we have to
steer the boat up stream. One of my men knows rowing. But he is a novice.
When he came here we were rowing downstream. So that was not a problem.
But now we need a professional to take us against the river flow. Go to the other
bank and from there steer towards the northern gate of the Fort.”

“Once we reach the other bank we can walk from there. The flow is quite
intense. It is very difficult to row upstream.”

“But if we land on the other bank this ruffian might try some mischief. We have

no other option. We have to go only through the river till we reach the gates of
the Fort.”

Karuthiruman and another started rowing the boat. The leader came near
Vandhiya Thevan and whispered:”Don’t try to act smart, uh?”

“Looks like you know everything about me.”

“Why not? I saw you coming out of the jail throwing the Doctor’s son in your
place. Then you tried to escape from us.”

“I will have to give it to you. You are smarter than me. I thought nobody noticed
what happened in the underground prison.”

“Thambi, there is no place in the Chozha country where our Chief Minister’s
eyes and ears cannot reach. He has his men in Kanchi, in Lanka, even in the
Kadambur Palace. And also in the underground jail. Our Chief Minister knew
that the Doctor’s son is a perfect fool. Hence he sent me as a back-up.”

“Perhaps the Chief Minister knew that I will try to get out of the Fort through
this route. He has really strange eyes and ears. If it is true then should he not
know that I am innocent and that it was unjust and unfair to have imprisoned
me?”

“That is not his responsibility. The Emperor should decide whether you are
guilty or not. Kodumbalur Chieftain has the right to punish you for trying to

escape from the underground jail.”

“Where are you taking me now?”

“First to the Kodumbalur Chieftain. He will be waiting at the Northern Gate.”

“Is he waiting for me?”

“I have never seen a more arrogant man than you. Do you think that the General
of the Southern Command of the mighty Chozha Army, the first and foremost
amongst the Chieftains, the one who annihilated the Pandya Clan, the one who
conquered Lanka, the one and only Kodumbalur Velar Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari
will wait for you at the gates of the Fort?”

“Then, he is waiting for.. “

“Parthibendran is coming back with the Pazhuvettaraiyars and the other
Chieftains who were camping at Thiruppurambayam.”

“Even the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar?”

“Yes. He knows the truth about Karikalan’s death. Once he comes there will be a
public enquiry against you in the presence of the Emperor. If you are not guilty
you should prove it at that time.”

Vandhiya Thevan was depressed hearing the news.

Pazhuvettaraiyars and Parthibendran will put the blame entirely on me. How
can I ever look at the Emperor or Ponniyin Selvan after listening to those
charges? How can I be my own witness? How can I prove my innocence?

“I have never harmed you, Sir. Please let me go away. I am not guilty. I have
been the best friend of the Crown Prince. I have been trapped in this case purely
because of the circumstances. You work for the Chief Minister. Didn’t the Chief
Minister order you bring out the mad man? He is here. Take him with you. But
leave me alone. Please.. Sir. May you forever be blessed.” Vandhiya Thevan’s
pleas were passionate.

“If I let you go what will you give me?”

“I will reward you at the right time.”

“The right time is never going to come. Even if it comes I don’t need your help.
Tell me what you will give me now.”

Vandhiya Thevan thought of the gold coins he had in his waist.

“I will fill both your hands with gold coins.”

“Oh! That’s good. But first show me the coins.”

“Please release me from this bondage. Untie the ropes. The coins are in my waist
band.”

“Don’t try to act smart. “

The stout guard bent down to loosen the ropes that bound Vandhiya Thevan to
the boat.

Vandhiya Thevan while keeping his eyes focussed on the guard took out the
coins from his waist-band and gave them to the guard.

The guard examined the coins.

“Thambi, did you steal these coins from Pazhuvettaraiyar’s treasury? Or did you
steal it directly from the mint? Whatever it may be now there are three charges
against you. Number one, murder. Number two, trying to escape from the
underground jail. And Number three, stealing from the Government’s treasury.
Each of these offences merits capital punishment.”

“I have served the Chozha Empire. I have carried messages for the King’s
family. I tried to give my life to save Karikalan’s. Don’t I have the right to get a
few gold coins as my wages? I took them for my travel expenses.”

“Tell that in the Royal Court at the time of enquiry.”

“So you are not going to let me go?”

Vandhiya Thevan asked him in a threatening voice.

“Even if the sun were to rise in the West and even if it is proved that Lord Shiva
is greater than Lord Vishnu I won’t betray my country for a few gold coins.”

Vandhiya Thevan was closely observing the expression on Karuthiruman’s face.
He was looking at Vandhiya Thevan expectantly. Vandhiya Thevan loosened the
ropes further and pulled the guard’s turban and the moustache at the same time.
Surprisingly they got detached to reveal the real identity of the guard –
Azhwarkkadian.

“Oh the Vaishnava hypocrite? Is that you?”

Azhwarkkadian tried to save his moustache and turban. The gold coins fell down
from his hand. Vandhiya Thevan freed himself from the ropes that bound him
pushed down Azhwarkkadian. He used the same rope to bind the Vaishnavite to
the planks in the floor of the boat.

He unsheathed his sword and held it aloft.

When Vandhiya Thevan was freeing himself and tying Azhwarkkadian

Karuthiruman did not keep quiet. He hit the guard near him and threw him into
the river. The guard was struggling in water. Of the two remaining guards, one
approached Vandhiya Thevan and the other, Karuthiruman. They were afraid and
hesitant. Vandhiya Thevan lifted the sword high and was about to attack the
guard. The guard jumped in the river to save himself. Meanwhile Karuthiruman
hit another guard with the oar in his hand. He fell down in the boat. He was also
bound to the planks like Azhwarkkadian. The boat now moved downstream. The
guards who fell in the river were struggling to swim to the other bank.

“Gem amongst Vaishnavas, what do you say now?”

“What can I say? It’s all the wish of Lord Narayana. He is the one who binds. He
is the one who is bound. He is the one who pushes and the one who is pushed.
He is in the pillar, in a dust particle, in your sword and in my shoulders.”

“Then he should be in this water as well. Can I tie your limbs and throw you into
the river?”

“You know that they pushed Prahalad into the sea after tying him to a stone. But
Lord Narayana saved him. Either the Lord will save me now or I will reach His
abode. Either way it is fine with me.”

Vandhiya Thevan thought for a while.

“Look here. You have saved my live many times. I don’t know your real
motives. Whatever they may be I don’t want to kill you. But if you want to be
saved you will have to help me.”

“I was born in this world only to help others. Tell me what help do you want. If I
am released from this bondage I can help you.”

“We don’t want any physical help. So there is no need to release you. We want
two horses for our onward journey. If you tell us where can we find them we’ll
leave you floating in this boat. We will get down at the bank. The boat is sure to
reach some bank sooner or later. You can use your brains to free yourself and get
away.”

“I am happy that you asked something which I can do.”

“Can you help us get the horses?”

“I can. You can get one each. I know where the horses are. Do you know Vani’s
house?”

“Which Vani?”

“The one who gives flowers to the Thalikulathar Temple. She is born deaf and
dumb. She is Chendan Amudhan’s mother.”

Karuthiruman came very close to the Vaishnavite. He was obviously excited.

“I know. I know the house. It’s in the garden.”

“There are two good horses at that place at this very second.””

“How are you so sure about it?”

“One is my horse. I secured it near Vani’s hut before getting into the boat. The
other one is Chendan Amudhan’s. Poor boy, he is not trained in horse riding. His
horse was a little wild and it tossed him down. He was already weak because of
the fever. Now because of the shock of this fall he is bed-ridden. They say his
life is at risk. Anyway he won’t need the horse hereafter.”

Vandhiya Thevan was concerned.

“Who is there to take care of Amudhan?”

“His mother and Poonkuzhali are with him.”

Karuthiruman entered the conversation suddenly.

“Which mother?”

The other two looked askance at him.

“What did you say?”

“Does Sembianmadevi know that Chendan Amudhan’s life is in danger?”

“Probably. She has bestowed some endowments on the family. She supports the
family. But everybody in the Palace is grieving for Karikalan’s death. Who is
going to care for Amudhan?”

Vandhiya Thevan looked at Karuthiruman. “What do you think? Can we have a
look at Chendan Amudhan and his mother before we go?”

Karuthiruman nodded consent.

Vandhiya Thevan issued instructions.

“Then steer the boat towards the bank.”

Then he spoke to Azhwarkkadian in a threatening voice.

“Vaishnavite, don’t try to play games with me. Whatever happens to me I will
first send you to the abode of Shiva, that is Kailas, before doing anything else.”

“No, Thambi. Please don’t do it. May you be blessed. Send me to the abode of
Lord Vishnu, where he sits with my Holy Mother and his angels, called the
Nithya Sooris.

Chapter 60: Amudhan’s Grief

Chendan Amudhan was lying in a hut which was in the centre of his garden.
Poonkuzhali was taking care of him. Amudhan’s mother Vani had prepared gruel
for him.

Only a little while ago a doctor from Sundara Chozhan’s Infirmary had visited
Amudhan. Poonkuzhali took him aside to enquire about Amudhan’s health.

“How is he doing now? Will he survive?”

“He was weak because he had not recovered completely from an earlier attack of
fever. Added to that he had been on a long journey. And to cap it all he had a bad
fall. He is young and he can survive all these. But something is eating his
insides. That slows down the pace of recovery.”

Poonkuzhali was upset. She spoke to him in a very soft voice.

“What bothers you, Amudha? Why are you listless? The Doctor says that your
recovery is delayed because of your mental worries.”

“What shall I say, Poonkuzhali? Shall I tell the truth? Shall I hide it and tell
something pleasing to your ears?”

“Are you insinuating that I am not true to my heart?”

“It is dangerous to talk to you. Please be silent. I will see your face and derive
my happiness from its beauty.”

“If I had been born dumb and deaf like my aunts you would have been happy,
right?”

“Not at all. I forget myself when you sing. What’s there in small talk? Why
don’t you sing a song from Devaram?”

“No. I won’t. First tell me what bothers you. Only then I will sing.”

“Listen. My only worry is that I will recover soon.”

“Are you in your senses? Your mother and I have been praying to every God we
know that you should recover soon. And you talk like this! What happened to
you?”

“If I am cured you will go away from me. I am worried about that, Poonkuzhali.
Only about that.”

Poonkuzhali’s beautiful face resembled a red lotus with fresh dew drops stuck to
its petals. There was a smile on her lips and tears in her eyes.

“My heart melts for you. I don’t have the heart to leave you. But nor can I be
with you.”

“I know, Poonkuzhali. The sea beckons you. So what? Take me with you. Just
nod your consent. I will be cured in a jiffy.”

“Amudha, the vow I have taken stands in the way.”

“What vow?”

“That I will marry only a King and sit with him on the throne. Or else I will be a
spinster all my life.”

“I know, Poonkuzhali. Ponniyin Selvan has got a place of pride in your heart.
But do you think it is possible?”

“You got it wrong, Amudha. Everyone born in this country has lost his or her
heart to Ponniyin Selvan. Men, women, old people, children .. everybody loves
Ponniyin Selvan. I too loved him. When he was down with fever only you and I
served him. And saved his life.”

“Didn’t you think of him in any other way? Are you sure?”

“Amudha, another woman is born in this world to marry Ponniyin Selvan. I was
teasing her. She took it seriously and has vowed not to ascend the throne at all.”

“She is a Princess born in a Royal household. She has vowed not to sit on the
throne. But you, an ordinary girl, have taken a vow to marry only a King or else
not marry at all.”

“Amudha, my aunt fell in love with a King. Her life was full of sorrow.
Whatever she failed to achieve – I mean the life of a queen – I will achieve in
my life. Through my marriage. Is it too much to ask for?”

“That desire spurted in your mind because of my bad luck, Poonkuzhali.”

“Why should you lose your heart, Amudha? Is there any rule that only those
born of a King should become a King? People like you born in ordinary families
have established kingdoms by their acts of valour and have become kings. You
too take a vow, Amudha. That either in this great country of Bharath, or
anywhere beyond the high seas you will establish a Kingdom out of your valiant
acts. I will never leave your side. I will serve you so long as I shall live.”

“Poonkuzhali, I was not born to rule. My mind is not in sword fights. I don’t
want to hurt even an ant. I am not enamoured by the Crown or the throne. I want
to spend my life singing about Lord Shiva and his devotees. I am not suited to
you. We are poles apart. I am leagues below you. My desire for you is like the
desire of a lame man for honey which is in the topmost branch of a tree. There is
no point in holding you here. Please leave this place. Don’t wait till I recover.”

They heard the sound of footsteps at the entrance. They stopped the

conversation.

Chapter 61: Engagement

Chendan Amudhan was lying on the bed. Poonkuzhali was talking to him.
When she heard the sound of foot steps she ran towards the entrance. Amudhan
thought for a moment that she was going to leave him forever. He sighed. He
even thought that when she went out of the house his life will go out of his body.

Amudhan saw Poonkuzhali opening the door, looking around and closing the
door. What was happening? Having bolted the door she was coming towards
Amudhan.

‘Perhaps there is a change of heart. Oh, I have melted her hardened heart. But
what is the big deal? She will insist that I should become a warrior, should
become a King and govern a large country. She will harp on this every time we
talk. Her mind is like a sea in turbulence caused caught in the storm of worldly
desires. Whereas my mind is a placid lake fully immersed in devotion to Lord
Shiva. The waters of the lake were disturbed and she was the reason behind it.
The turbulent sea can never live together with a placid lake. Poonkuzhali and I
will never be compatible. What is the point in building dream castles in the air?’

As soon as Poonkuzhali came near him she looked deeply into his eyes. Her eyes
seen so close resembled the fully blossomed lily flowers. Chendan Amudhan’s
heart was no longer a placid lake; it became turbulent; in fact more turbulent
than “the sea caught in the storm of worldly desires.”

“Why did you bolt the door? Perhaps my mother has come to see me.”

“Whosoever it may they have to wait till we finish talking. When the King and
the Queen are in their chambers they should not be disturbed at any cost.”

“King and Queen? Who is the King? And where is the Queen?”

“You are the King and I am the Queen. I have been harping on that subject for
hours on end. Still it has not gone in to your mind.”

“No Poonkuzhali. There is no point in ranting about it. I told you clearly. Our
attitudes are different. We won’t be compatible.”

“We will have to make our attitudes compatible.”

“That is mission impossible.”

“Impossible for you. Not for me. I can make our attitudes compatible. I have
decided Amudha. I have abandoned the thought of marrying a Prince and
ascending a throne. I have relinquished life at a palace and the attendant royal
pleasures. Your love is a billion times more precious than the kingly life and the
pleasures of the palace. Since you refuse to change for me I have decided to
change for you. Yes, I will marry you.”

Chendan Amudhan became ecstatic.

“Poonkuzhali, feel my forehead. Do I have fever? Or is this all a dream? Did I

hear you right? Have I understood you right?”

“Let me repeat. Since you can’t come to my way I am coming to yours. I will
marry you. My aunt Mandhakini’s life had planted some desires in my mind. I
thought the throne belonged to her and she was denied her right. That made me
furious. So I thought why not I sit on the throne that was denied to her. When
she died by the killer’s spear my desires also died with her. I learnt about the
trials and tribulations of those living in the Palace. Life in a Palace can never be
equal to the happy life of a carefree boat-girl, who rows her boat on the high
seas. Amudha, as soon as you are cured, we shall go to Kodikkarai. Lord
Kuzhakar is all alone in his temple in the middle of a forest. Let us serve the
Lord by offering flowers to him every day. And then we can go into the sea on
my boat. There are many small, sweet islands in Lanka. We will get down in one
of those islands. There you can be the King, and I, the Queen. There will be no
rivals for us. Nobody will fight against us. There will not be a mutiny to
dethrone us. Amudha, I am sure you do not have any objection .. .”

“I have but one objection, Poonkuzhali. Do I deserve that kind of bliss? I am still
wondering whether you are telling the truth. I am sure you are not playing games
with me. I am sure you are not interested in gifting a great disappointment to me
later on. No, no. You are telling the truth. Tell me when we can go to
Kodikkarai.”

“As soon as you are cured.”

“I am already cured. I will stand up and walk. Just see.”

Amudhan tried to stand up. Poonkuzhali held his hand and made him lie down.

“No, Amudha. Please wait for one day. Please.. “

They heard a knock on the door.

“I think it’s my mother. Let’s share this happy news with her.”

Poonkuzhali opened the door. She was surprised by what she saw. It was not
Amudhan’s mother. It was a soldier. As soon as the door opened the soldier
moved a little away.

It was Queen Mother Sembianmadevi and Madhuranthakan. Poonkuzhali saw
two palanquins a little away. The palanquin bearers and the guards were chatting
under a tree. One of them was holding a torch. The scene was illuminated by the
torch. Poonkuzhali saw everything.

Poonkuzhali ran before the Queen Mother and bowed with reverence.

“ Most Welcome, Your Highness.”

“How is your cousin now? Where is Vani?”

Queen Mother entered the hut.

Madhuranthakan stood outside. He was staring into the hut with eyes lined with
inexpressible jealousy and impotent anger. Chendan Amudhan realised that the
visitor was a saintly lady devoted to Lord Shiva and his benefactress, the Queen
Mother. Amudhan stood up to welcome her.

“Mother, you could not have come at a better time. We have got the rare blessing
of conveying the happy news first to you and get your blessings. It should have
happened only by the grace of Lord Shiva. I have not yet shared the news even
with my mother. Mother, after so many years, this girl Poonkuzhali has
consented to marry me. You should conduct the wedding ceremony and bless us,
Mother. After the marriage we plan to move over to Kodikkarai to serve Lord
Kuzhakar by offering flowers.”

Was the Queen Mother happy? Or was she sad? Nobody could tell. There was a
smile on her lips and tears on her eyes.

Amudhan and Poonkuzhali prostrated before her. Her voice was choked.

“My dear children, May you be blessed with a happy married life.”

Amudhan’s mother Vani reached the place at that time. Queen Mother
communicated to her through signals that she came to know about Amudhan’s
health. And she was happy to hear the wedding news. There was a strange
expression on Vani’s face. She appeared happy and shocked at the same time.

The Queen Mother was conversing with Amudhan and Poonkuzhali for a few
minutes before taking leave of them.

Queen Mother and Madhuranthakan walked towards the place where their
palanquins were kept. When Queen Mother was sure that there was nobody
around she spoke to Madhuranthakan in a soft voice.

“Did you see him? He is my son. I bore him in my womb for ten months. Yes,
Chendan Amudhan is my son. I knew this when he was five years old. When he
was eight days old there was no movement in his body. I thought he was dead.
As I badly wanted a child I adopted you as my son. I even ordered that my child
should be buried. Vani took him. She did not return for a long time. I saw her
and this boy after five years. I came to know the truth. But I did not abandon
you. I did not invite him to the palace for the only reason he was born of me. I
thought of the whole thing as a game played by God. I brought you up as my
own son. Now I seek a boon from you. Tell me that you don’t want the Chozha
throne. I may not even object to your desire to become a King. But I am worried
that there is a possibility of your descendants being dumb.”

Madhuranthakan was shocked as if he had been hit by a ghost. He had married
the daughter of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. The couple had a girl two years ago.
The child had not started to speak. Unable to bear the shock he leaned on a tree
nearby.

Queen Mother spoke very softly:

“My dear child, you appear frozen, why? Come let’s go. Come with me to the
Palace. Reflect on what I told you. You have time till tomorrow.”

Madhuranthakan spoke in a halting voice.

“Ma, what is there to think? You go ahead. Let me talk to the person who should
have been in my place in the Palace I will come a little later.”

“Take care. When you come make sure that the screens of your palanquin are
pulled in to cover you. If the Kodumbalur soldiers saw you they may raise
slogans against you.”

Queen Mother walked towards her palanquin. She did not notice the fury and
envy in the face of Madhuranthakan.

Chapter 62: The Spear Sprang!

Madhuranthakan stood in the same place for some time, deliberating whether he
should go into the hut or go back to the Fort. It took a few minutes for him to
make up his mind. He went to his palanquin and said something to the guards
and the bearers. He took something from his palanquin. The bearers carried
away the empty palanquin. The torch-bearer also went with them.

Madhuranthakan walked towards Amudhan’s hut. Suddenly a man emerged
from behind the tree from the place he and his mother had been standing a few
minutes ago. Madhuranthakan was shocked. The person who emerged was
Karuthiruman, known as “mad man” in the underground prison. Karuthiruman
looked every inch a mad man. And he appeared out of nowhere at that time in
the night. Naturally Madhuranthakan was shocked.

Madhuranthakan flashed the knife he had taken from the palanquin.
Karuthiruman stopped him.

“Please don’t do it. I am not your enemy.”

“If you are not my enemy, then who are you? My friend?”

“In a way, yes.”

Madhuranthakan tried to express his fury and frustration through an awkward

smile.

“Good friend indeed. When the whole world is slowly slipping away from me I
at least got you.”

“You are right. I am going to do something which nobody in this world can do.”

“What is that? Make it fast. I don’t have the time. I need to attend to an urgent
matter.”

“What is that?” Madhuranthakan could not bear Karuthiruman’s pointed glance.

“I have to go to the Palace you know.” – Karuthiruman knew that he was not
telling the truth.

“Are you sure you want to go back to the Palace where you have absolutely no
right to stay?”

Madhuranthakan was shocked.

“What the hell are you saying? What do you know? And how? Tell me fast or
else you had it.”

He flashed the killer knife once again.

“Please don’t use the knife on me. Make it sharp so that you can use it on your
enemy. I was behind the tree and overheard the conversation between you and
your mother.“

“You overheard our conversation and came to know the secret. And that made
you bold enough to block me.”

“No. I knew the secret long back. I know much more. She might have told you
that she is not your mother and Emperor Kandaraathithar is not your father. She
might have told you who your mother is. But she could not have told you who
your father is.”

“Do you know that?”

“I do.”

Madhuranthakan was afraid that the mad man might claim to be his father. His
voice was full of anger and disgust.

“How do you know? First, who are you?”

“I am your father’s servant.”

Madhuranthakan was relieved.

Karuthiruman came near him.

“Your father is. .. .”

He revealed a name. As soon as Madhuranthakan heard it he felt dizzy. He lost
his balance and was about to fall down. He held Karuthiruman’s shoulders and
balanced himself.

“Is it true? Do I really belong to a royal clan?”

“Yes. I came to reveal this secret to you several years ago. I was looking for a
chance to talk to you in private. As my ill luck would have it Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar saw me and threw me into the underground jail.”

“When did you come out? How?”

“I came out only today. A young man named Vandhiya Thevan helped me come
out.”

“I heard that. Was he not charged with the offence of murdering Karikalan?”

“Yes. But he is innocent.”

“Why should we worry about it? Let him be the murderer. Who cares? Where is
he now?”

“He is there hiding behind the fence. He is waiting for me. He has horses for
both of us. He will be angry if I spend time talking to you. But I am not
bothered. I am happy that I met you here.”

“When did you come here?”

“A little while ago. We learnt that there will be two horses outside the hut and
came to take them. As we were looking for the horses you and your mother came
on the road with torches illuminating your way. That helped us find the horses. I
saw Vani after several years. As I was talking to her in sign language you two
came near the hut. We never thought you would come here. Vandhiya Thevan
ran away to hide behind the fence. Vani and I stood behind this tree for some
time. Then she went into the hut. I was standing alone. And I had the chance to
see you.”

“It’s all right. What are you going to do now?”

“Whatever you want me to do. Are you planning to go back to the Palace even
after knowing about your birth? Bear this in mind. A few other people know that
you do not belong to the Chozha clan. The Chief Minister and his spy
Azhwarkkadian know. Someday or other . ..”

“You are right. I don’t want to go back to the Palace. What do you suggest?”

“There are two horses here. You make a show of going into the hut and coming
back. Meanwhile I will engage Vandhiya Thevan in a conversation and distract
him. You throw the knife on him and kill him. We shall take the horses and go to
Kodikkarai and from there to Srilanka. The Lankan King is an enemy of the
Chozha clan. He is the friend of the Pandya King. I know the Lankan King. I
know where he has kept the Pandya Crown and the opal necklace. What do you
say?”

Madhuranthakan was lost in thoughts. Within a few minutes his mind built many
castles on the air.

“Make it fast. What have you decided? Vandhiya Thevan can come here any
time.”

“Should I kill him?”

“If you can’t give that knife to me. I will do it for you.”

“No. I have another work for this knife. I know Vandhiya Thevan. He is a
warrior. We will take him with us.”

“Yes, we can. But we need another horse.”

“That is not an issue. I am after all still a Chozha Prince.” Madhuranthakan
expressed his pent up fury through his laugh.

Then he ordered Karuthiruman.

“You go. Ask Vandhiya Thevan to be patient. Meanwhile I will have a word with
the resident of this hut.”

Karuthiruman walked to Vandhiya Thevan. The darkness outside was punctuated
by the occasional flashes of torches carried by the people using the high road. In
the occasional flashes of light Karuthiruman could see two majestic Arabian
steeds secured to the fence. But Vandhiya Thevan was not there. He called him.
There was no response.

‘He has gone. In a way that’s good, thought Karuthiruman

When Vandhiya Thevan and Karuthiruman had first come to the hut the place
was completely dark. Feeble light rays came from the oil lamp inside the hut.

Amudhan’s mother Vani had gone to fetch water from the lotus pond. She saw
the two men in dark and hesitated. First she saw the face of Vandhiya Thevan.
Her face blossomed. She remembered Amudhan bringing in Vandhiya Thevan as
a guest long back. She welcomed him with a nod.

But when she saw Karuthiruman she froze. She felt as if she saw some

apparition. Karuthiruman tried to talk to her in sign language and allayed her
fears.

Vandhiya Thevan left them there and approached the hut. He heard the sound of
the door being bolted from within. He peered through a makeshift window. He
expected to see a sick Amudhan fighting for his life. Instead he saw him happily
talking to Poonkuzhali. He was happy. He was no longer worried about
Amudhan’s health. He was debating whether he should interrupt their
conversation to take leave of Amudhan. By that time the Queen Mother,
Madhuranthakan and their retinue arrived.

Vandhiya Thevan moved away from the hut and jumped the fence. He saw two
horses there. He was relieved that Azhwarkkadian had not disappointed him. He
waited there for Karuthiruman.

Karuthiruman did not come even after the palanquins, the guards and the torches
went away. Vandhiya Thevan lost his patience. He jumped the fence and went in.
He saw Madhuranthakan and Karuthiruman under a tree. They were engaged in
serious conversation. Vandhiya Thevan was wondering what those two could
have in common which merited such a serious discussion. He overheard a part of
their conversation.

When Madhuranthakan went towards the hut Vandhiya Thevan followed him.
Madhuranthakan stood near the door. He was debating whether he should knock
or not. He heard the sound of somebody laughing. Perhaps the laugh changed his
mind. Or he did not have the courage to do what he wanted to do. He walked
back following Karuthiruman.

Vandhiya Thevan did not want to be seen by Madhuranthakan. He sprang to a
place behind a large tree. There was a window in the back wall of the hut.

Through that window some light from the hut escaped outside. In that faint light
Vandhiya Thevan saw a figure holding a short spear in his hand.

The figure peered into the window. Then it took aim and was about to throw the
spear. But it did not throw. At the same time Vandhiya Thevan heard the sound
of horses going away. Vandhiya Thevan was in a dilemma. If both the horses
were gone then it would be impossible for him to escape. But if he went out to
save the horses he might not be able to prevent what the shadowy figure was
about to do.

Vandhiya Thevan’s dilemma lasted precisely for a minute. Let the horses go. His
duty was clearly in that place. He approached the dark figure.

He heard a woman’s scream from inside the house. Vandhiya Thevan abandoned
all caution and ran up to the figure. The shadowy figure which was about to
throw the spear on somebody inside the hut was distracted by the sound of
Vandhiya Thevan running.

He threw the spear on Vandhiya Thevan. The spear pierced his body near the
costal bone. Vandhiya Thevan fell down. The shadowy figure did not wait to see
what happened. It ran away.

Chapter 63: Pinaakapani’s Revenge

Ponniyin Selvan, Princess Kunthavai, Vanathi and others went to the
underground jail to see Vandhiya Thevan. But he was not there. In his place they
found the Doctor’s son Pinaakapani who was bound by chains attached to the
iron rings embedded in the wall.

“The murderer and the mad man have escaped.” Pinaakapani kept on shouting.
Kunthavai and Vanathi remembered him. Kunthavai had sent him as Vandhiya
Thevan’s companion to Kodikkarai.

Pinaakapani was released from prison. He briefed them on what happened. He
was anxious that those who escaped should be caught at the earliest. But those
who heard his story did not show any hurry in capturing the escaped prisoners.
They secretly praised Vandhiya Thevan for what he had done. They all thought
that in a way it was good that Vandhiya Thevan was not in jail. Manimekalai
wanted to express her thoughts openly. Kunthavai read her mind and gently
admonished her.

“Sister, don’t talk anything here. This is a very sensitive issue. Whatever is there
in your mind share it with me. But not here. Do it in private after we go back.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain had also come to the prison. He too heard about the
escape drama. He was not eager in capturing the escaped prisoners. He never
believed that Vandhiya Thevan had killed Karikalan. He knew the regards Prince
Arulmozhivarman and Kunthavai had for the Prince of Vallam. Instead of being
angry he smiled. He appreciated Vandhiya Thevan.

“That young warrior is pretty smart. Once he escaped from the prison at
Mathottam in Lanka.”

The Doctor’s son was burning in jealousy.

“Should we not do something to capture them?”

“Where could they have gone? They could not have gone out of the Fort.”

Pinaakapani was fuming now.

“No, you are wrong. That murderer knows the underground passage. He could
have gone out of the Fort through that.”

Now the General was really angry.

“Idiot, are you trying to advise me? You are the reason for their escape. Who
knows, perhaps you conspired with them to enact this drama. Put him in jail
again.”

Pinaakapani shivered.

“No, General. I swear on my mother that I don’t belong to them. I was sent here
by the Chief Minister.”

Ponniyin Selvan intervened.

“Yes he is the Chief Minister’s man. Let us send him to the Chief Minister with
proper security. Let him decide on his punishment.”

General Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari gave the assignment of entrusting Pinaakapani
to the Chief Minister to four of his armed guards.

Pinaakapani narrated the escape drama to the Chief Minister. He too was not
excited. The Chief Minister followed a rule in his espionage activities. He
would never trust a single man with a great task. If the task was given to one
person another person would be sent as a back-up and oversee the work of the
first man. He had sent the best of his men, Azhwarkkadian, as a back-up for
Pinaakapani. Hence he was not unduly worried by the Doctor’s son messing up
with the assignment. The Chief Minister knew that Azhwarkkadian would come
back with the escaped prisoners; in the least, he would bring some news about
them. In a way if those two men were not captured it would solve many
problems in the state, thought the Chief Minister.

After completing his narration Pinaakapani pleaded with the Chief Minister.

“Minister Sir, please give me four armed men. I will bring them back.”

The Chief Minister was furious.

“Idiot! You have messed up the whole thing. Didn’t I tell you that nobody should
know about that mad man? Otherwise I would have been there to get him out.
Now everybody in the Palace knows about him. As if that is not enough you
want to publicize their escape. I don’t want your service any more. You are unfit
to be a spy. Go away. Never come again before me. Don’t tell this to anybody. If
you did I will have you impaled.”

Pinaakapani hung his head down and stepped out of the Chief Minister’s house.
His mind was being consumed by jealousy and anger. All his fury was focussed
on Vandhiya Thevan. It was only because of him that he blundered in the
assignment and lost a chance to get into Government service. And it was because
of him the General and the Chief Minister shouted at him. Those people could
afford to be casual about the whole affair. But he would somehow find Vandhiya
Thevan and seek revenge. Even if that mad man ran away it was not his cup of
tea. But he was determined to do something to Vandhiya Thevan. He had been
his enemy ever since he travelled with him to Kodikkarai. And in the end he had
ruined his career and messed up with his life. He would give his life to find him
again and if possible kill him.

Pinaakapani got out of the Thanjavur Fort. He was sure that Vandhiya Thevan
would not be inside the Fort. He would have used the underground passage to go
out of the Fort. But he did not know where the passage was. He did not know
where it came out. He was sure that the end of the passage should be there
somewhere in the outer wall of the Fort. He decided to go around the Fort
alongside the wall. He might find the exit of the underground passage. And if
luck was on his side he might even see Vandhiya Thevan and the mad man
coming out of the passage.

Pinaakapani was walking close the Fort wall on the other bank of Vadavaaru
River. He was carefully examining every square inch of the wall. Kodumbalur

Soldiers were going around the wall at regular intervals. They were holding
bright torches.

The Doctor’s son still had the Chief Minister’s signet ring with him. Even if he
was accosted by the soldiers he had means of escape. But that would delay his
mission. So whenever he saw soldiers he hid himself behind the trees on the
road. He came out after making sure that the soldiers had passed him. Once
when he was hiding like that he saw two men hiding a little away from him. One
of them was holding a sword. Light from the torch came through the bushes sand
was reflected by the shining blade of the sword. But Pinaakapani did not know
who they were.

Once the soldiers passed them the two men came out of their hiding, came to the
bank and walked away from Pinaakapani. At first Pinaakapani ignored them and
walked ahead. Then he had a flash. Those two men could be the escapees –
Vandhiya Thevan and the mad man. But the two men were walking towards the
gates of the Fort. That would be suicidal for a person who had just escaped from
jail. So Pinaakapani did not have any suspicion.

Vandhiya Thevan was extremely smart. He was courageous. He must have some
unusual strategy. If only he found out what it was, who knows, he might hit
some pay dirt there.

Pinaakapani turned around and started following the two men maintaining a
respectable distance from them. One of the two men was armed with a sword. So
Pinaakapani did not want to confront them. It was not the right time to pick up a
fight with the strangers. He should first make sure that they are the escapees.
After all Pinaakapani had a short spear with him. He planned to use it suddenly
and kill his arch rival Vandhiya Thevan.

He saw the northern gate of the Fort. The place was buzzing with activity. There
were several palanquins sandwiched between hordes of palace guards and
hundreds of other men. The place was illuminated by several torches that it
almost looked like day. Someone very important was either going out of the Fort
or coming in.

My God! Where are the two men? How did they vanish? Did they take a short
route to somewhere? Where could they have gone? To the Royal high road? Can
escaped prisoners use the high road? Where could they have gone?

Pinaakapani remembered that Chendan Amudhan’s hut was close by. He also
remembered that once Vandhiya Thevan was hiding there. Yes, those two were
Vandhiya Thevan and the mad man. They were headed for Chendan Amudhan’s
hut. Or that over-smart Vandhiya Thevan might have a different plan which
would anyway come to light soon.

Pinaakapani walked towards Chendan Amudhan’s garden. It was an ordeal to
find the way in darkness. When he finally reached the place he was surprised to
see palanquins and guards. He did not know what to do. Fortunately for him the
palanquins went away soon followed by the guards.

Pinaakapani looked around. He saw the heads of two horses near the fence. His
curiosity was piqued. He walked slowly towards the hut. He saw two men
talking under a tree. They should be the persons he was looking for. But were
they? Somebody in high place should be helping them to get away. Or perhaps
the King’s family was part of their grand escape plan. The mad man was
screaming that he knew some secrets about the Royal family. Perhaps they do
not want the secrets to come out. And therefore they helped him escape from the
prison.

He stared at the two men talking under the tree. One of them was the mad man.
There was no doubt it. Pinaakapani could recognise his husky voice. Then the
other person should be Vandhiya Thevan. But he did not look like him. Oh My
God! Was it Madhuranthakan? A Prince’s crown adorned his head. He was
draped in silks. Jewels adorned his neck. There were jewels in his hand too –
bracelets and rings. What did the Prince have to do with this raving mad man?

But that was not his problem now. He wanted to find his avowed enemy
Vandhiya Thevan and kill him. Where was he? Should be somewhere around. He
was the one walking with a sword in his hand. Pinaakapani remembered seeing
horses near the fence. Was Vandhiya Thevan sitting on a horse waiting for his
accomplice, the mad man? Probably. And Prince Madhuranthakan was helping
them. Perhaps Madhuranthakan instigated Vandhiya Thevan to kill Karikalan.
Madhuranthakan was giving some last minute message to them before they
would leave the Empire for good. My God! If this was true, and if only
Pinaakapani could prove it.. .

Pinaakapani’s brain worked overtime. He finally decided to go near the horses
and check the place. If Vandhiya Thevan was there alone then Pinaakapani could
use his short-spear on him. Then he could capture the mad man and threaten him
to reveal his plan. The horses stood beyond the fence at a place right opposite to
where Madhuranthakan and the mad man were talking. Pinaakapani could not
cross them to reach there. There was the lotus pond in between. So he thought of
going behind the hut, jump the fence and go near the horses.

When Pinaakapani reached the rear side of the hut he heard the voice of
Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali. Pinaakapani lusted for Poonkuzhali when
he first met her at Kodikkarai. That was the first reason for his anger and
jealousy towards Vandhiya Thevan. When he went there to capture Mandhakini
he came to know the relationship between Amudhan and Poonkuzhali. He was
jealous of Amudhan as well.

Pinaakapani climbed up to the window-sill on the rear wall of the hut and saw
Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali exchanging sweet nothings. That added
fuel to the fire of jealousy in his heart. He overheard their conversation. He
heard them discussing their wedding plans. He heard them talk about leading a
happy life in Kodikkarai. The love birds laughed together. The sound of their
laughing poured tons of ghee to the fire of jealousy raging in his mind.
Pinaakapani was devastated.

At last the son of the dumb woman was going to marry Poonkuzhali.
Pinaakapani could not bear to think of that. He abandoned the idea of capturing
Vandhiya Thevan and the mad man. He wanted first despatch the young man
fond of singing Devaram songs to the feet of the Lord. Other things could wait.

Having decided his target he moved a little away the window and aimed his
spear on Amudhan. Poonkuzhali saw the spear and the hand holding it. She
screamed. Amudhan also looked at the window. Now Amudhan’s bare chest was
exposed. If only Pinaakapani used this opportunity Amudhan would surely die.

When Pinaakapani’s hand lifted the spear high in the air he heard the sound of
footsteps. Somebody was running towards him. He turned around. The man had
come too near. Pinaakapani did not know who the person was. There was no
time. Pinaakapani was sure that somebody had been trailing him -intent to thwart
his plans. Pinaakapani threw the spear intended for Amudhan on that man. The
man fell down.

At the same time Pinaakapani heard the sound of two horses leaving the place.
That should be Vandhiya Thevan and the mad man. Then the person who tried to
stop Pinaakapani and got the spear on him must be Madhuranthakan.
Pinaakapani trembled in fear.

Meanwhile loud screams were heard from inside the hut.

Pinaakapani started to run. His first priority was to run away from the place.
Capturing the prisoners who made good on the horses was only the next priority.
Pinaakapani ran like mad in the darkness of the night.

Afew minutes later Amudhan and Poonkuzhali came out of the house with a
lamp. They saw Vandhiya Thevan lying in a pool of blood with the spear stuck
to his costal bone. They gently lifted him and took him inside the hut. They
found out that Vandhiya Thevan was alive. They heaved a sigh of relief.

Amudhan’s mother once gave a herbal treatment to Kandhanmaran who was
stabbed in the back. She had to now repeat it for Vandhiya Thevan.

Chapter 64: Tell Me The Truth

The boat in which Azhwarkkadian was bound moved along the river for some
distance and then reached near the bank. The two guards who were struggling in
water swam to the bank. They came near the boat. Azhwarkkadian did not get
down from the boat. He asked the guards to hide themselves.

Azhwarkkadian wanted Vandhiya Thevan and Karuthiruman to flee the country.
He was sure that the Chief Minister’s wanted that too. If these two men were in
Thanjavur then there had to be an enquiry on so many sensitive old issues. Both
the Chief Minister and Azhwarkkadian were sure that Vandhiya Thevan was not
guilty. Even a perfunctory enquiry against him might ruffle some feathers and
might embarrass people in high places. Even If the people knew that an enquiry
like that was being held it would make things more complicated. Prince
Arulmozhivarman might lose a dear friend; the Chozha Empire might lose an
able strategist. The Chief Minister knew about Kunthavai’s feelings for
Vandhiya Thevan. He was also aware of Manimekalai’s open declaration of love
for the Prince of Vallam. In these circumstances the only way out was to let him
escape from prison.

After finding the horses at Amudhan’s place Vandhiya Thevan and
Karuthiruman would go along the river banks. Azhwarkkadian was waiting for
them to pass just to make sure that would be beyond the reach of the long hand
of law. Karuthiruman had told him that if they moved along the bank they would
go up to the place where River Vadavaaru merged with River Paamani. They
would have crossed half the distance to Kodikkarai at that point. They would
surely take this route, thought Azhwarkkadian. He wanted to block them on the
way and give a message to Vandhiya Thevan.

Azhwarkkadian calculated the time. They should have passed by him by that

time. But they had not.

“I got it wrong. They should have taken a different route. Or something
unexpected should have happened.”

When Azhwarkkadian tried to get down from the boat he heard the sound of
horse-hoofs. Azhwarkkadian resumed his lying position pretending to be still
bound.

When the horses came near he shouted at the top of his voice.

“WHO IS THAT? PLEASE STOP. PLEASE HELP ME. I HAVE BEEN TIED
TO THIS BOAT. PLEASE RELEASE ME. PLEASE... “

Azhwarkkadian could see the rider in the first horse. He was sure it was
Karuthiruman. When the second horse came near he screamed: “Vandhiya
Theva! Please stop!”

The second horse did not stop as well. It was only then that Azhwarkkadian
looked at the rider. He was frozen. “There is some problem with my eye-sight.
Or I should have lost my mind.”

The horses which went past him stopped at a distance. One horse came back.

Karuthiruman jumped down from the horse. He came near Azhwarkkadian’s

boat.

“Oh Poor soul! You have not yet been released! Very sad! You helped us a lot!
To show my gratitude let me release you. But don’t try to show your cheap tricks
on me.”

When he bent down Azhwarkkadian sprang on him and pushed him down.

Karuthiruman did not expect this sudden attack. He did not move for some time.
Then he started pleading.

“Please leave me. Let me go. May you be blessed. I came here to help you. And
you have betrayed me. Your friend Vandhiya Thevan is waiting for you there. He
says you are his best friend. If he knows that you have played a cheap trick on
me, what will he think of you? You can’t go back alive. If you want to live leave
me alone. Please, I beg of you..”

“You are the worst liar I have ever seen. Tell me who is there in the other horse.
If you tell me the truth I will leave you. Or else I’ll kill you right now.”

“Yes, I lied. You can’t be deceived. Vandhiya Thevan is not in the other horse. It
is Prince Madhuranthakan. Leave me. I will get you a good reward from him.”

“Let the rewards wait. Where is Vandhiya Thevan?”

“He got down from the horse at the house in the flower garden. I did not see him
after that.”

“Where are you guys going?”

“To the same place where I was planning to go with Vandhiya Thevan.”

“That means to Srilanka.”

“Yes.”

“Why is Madhuranthakan coming to Lanka with you?”

“How do I know? You will have to ask him. When I said I am going to Srilanka,
he said he will come with me.”

Azhwarkkadian increased the pressure on Karuthiruman’s chest.

“Tell whose son is Madhuranthakan”

“Dumb question. The whole world knows that he is the only son of
Sembianmadevi. No, no. Please don’t press my chest. I will die.
Madhuranthakan is Mandhakini’s son.”

“Who is Madhuranthakan’s father? Tell the truth or consider yourself dead.”

Karuthiruman told the truth.

“Good. You are saved. One last question. Whose son is Chendan Amudhan?”

“Why do you ask me? You know.”

“Isn’t he the son of Emperor Kandaraathithar and Sembianmadevi”

“Yes. But for me he would have died long back. Vani, who is both deaf and
dumb, was trying to bury the child. I was there by sheer coincidence. I heard the
child crying. I saved the child. Leave me alive at least for that good deed.”

“I am letting you go precisely for that good deed.”

Azhwarkkadian got up from his place.

Karuthiruman ran towards his horse. He sprang on the beast. The two horses ran
along the bank of the River in the shadowy darkness of the rainy season.

Chapter 65: Ghost!

Azhwarkkadian summoned his men and started to walk towards the northern
gate of the Fort. When he fought with Karuthiruman he deliberately kept his men
away. There was a reason for it. He did not want them to know the secrets which
Karuthiruman was likely to share with to him.

As they were half way through Azhwarkkadian saw a man running on the road
as if he were possessed by some spirits. The man dashed against
Azhwarkkadian and started to run again. But Azhwarkkadian held him firmly in
his hold. He saw the face of the man.

“Oh, the Doctor’s son! Why are you running like a mad man?”

“Oh, the Vaishnava Fanatic! I thought it was some ghost or ghoul. In a way it is
good I met you. Tell me how long you have been walking on this side of the
river? Did you see two men on horses?”

“Yes, I did. Why do you ask?”

“Dumb question. If only you know who they were you won’t ask this silly
question. Can’t you recognise at least one of them?”

“One face was familiar.. . but.. ?”

“Who was it?”

“It seemed like Vandhiya Thevan. But then I decided it can’t be.”

“Oh My God! How did you decide that? HE IS VANDHIYA THEVAN.”

“What nonsense are you talking? Vandhiya Thevan is in the underground
prison.”

“He was. But he is not there now. Vandhiya Thevan and another mad man
escaped from the prison. They bound me to the prison wall and ran away.”

“Great. Pretty smart work. When they were trying you to tie you up what were
your hands doing? First, why did you go to the underground prison?”

“I went there on the orders of the Chief Minister. I don’t have the time to explain
from the beginning. Aren’t you working for the Chief Minister? Come with me.
We can capture them alive.”

“Why should we capture them? They have run away. So what? Let them enjoy
their hard earned freedom. Why should you and I bother about that?”

“I am surprised why the Chief Minister has employed dull heads like you. If

only all his men are like you, well, God alone can save the Chozha Empire.
Don’t you know that Vandhiya Thevan killed Adithya Karikalan? Added to that
he attacked somebody with his spear before running away on a horse.”

“Oh My God! Who was the victim?”

“I didn’t see who it was. I had no time. I was running behind Vandhiya Thevan.
If you don’t want to come with me, it’s fine. Don’t block my way. Leave me.”

“Doctor’s son, I have seen many fools in this world. But you are the greatest.
They are on horses. They are defying death and running for their lives. They are
two. You are one. And you are on foot. Do you think you can reach them let
alone capture them? It’s not my head ache any way. Go away.”

“You are right. That’s why I asked you to come with me. But you refuse.. . “

“What can I do? I tried to stop them. One of them hit me with a stick. It still
hurts. I am not used to fighting with people. Perhaps you can. ... but what is
this.. I see blood stain in your hand?”

“While I was in prison they hit me. Worst rascals.”

“Then why are you going behind them? Even while they were in prison being
bound in chains they have hit you. How do you think you can face them when
they are free?”

“What do you want me to do?”

“I am not suggesting any thing. Why do you blame me? If I were in your place I
will go back, tell the right people, get five or six men on horses and go in search
of those fugitives. I will also go riding on a horse armed with a sword and a
spear.”

Pinaakapani thought for a while. He had attached somebody with a spear near
Chendan Amudhan’s house. That could probably be Prince Madhuranthakan.
That thought made him shake in fear. There was no point in going on foot
chasing those two men. In case the person he had attacked was Prince
Madhuranthakan he should shift that blame also on Vandhiya Thevan. A person
who killed a Prince would not hesitate to kill another. The punishment was going
to be the same. He started believing that Vandhiya Thevan was the one who
killed the two Princes of the Chozha clan.

“Vaishnavite, what you say is right. I will come with you. You should help me.
You should tell the right person to help me with men and horses. I can’t
understand the minds of people in high places. I don’t know how to move with
them. I told this to the Chief Minister and the Kodumbalur Chieftain. “

“You told about what?”

“About the urgent need to capture those who escaped from jail. I begged them to
send some soldiers with me. They both started shouting at me. They called me a
fool. I don’t know what’s there in their minds.”

“What else could be there? They don’t trust you. They don’t want to entrust the

work to you. You let them run away even while they were in prison. How do you
hope to capture them while they are running?”

“I want to prove myself. That’s why I started on this mission alone. They will
have to stop at Kodikkarai. I know the probable places where Vandhiya Thevan
would hide. I have enough people there to help me.”

“Then why are you waiting here? Go. Best of luck.”

“Even then it will be better if I go on a horse. And take a few men with me. Will
you help me?”

By this time they had come near the northern gates of the Fort. On the high road
a little away decorated elephants adorned with howdahs, horses and soldiers on
foot were coming in a large procession. A huge crowd was waiting at the gates.
In the light of the torches they found out that Kodumbalur Chieftain,
Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman and Chief Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar were
there.

Azhwarkkadian teased the Doctor’s son.

“Our boss is standing there at the gate. Can we go to him?”

Pinaakapani hesitated.

“I have asked him once. He did not agree. Perhaps if you tell him that you saw
two men on horses he may believe you and offer help. But will he let me go for
this work?”

“You are right. Looks like they are waiting for something very important. There
is no point in going to them now. They may not listen to us. I see
Pazhuvettaraiyars on this side. Sambuvaraiyar is with them. There I see
Parthibendran and Kandhanmaran. Why not we tell them? They will show more
interest in capturing Vandhiya Thevan, dead or alive.”

The procession came near them. It was led by a person who was heralding the
glory of the Pazhuvur clan. He also praised the clan of Sambuvaraiyars, the
Mazhavaraiyar of Mazhappadi, Parthibendra Pallavan, Neelathankaraiyar and
the twin-parasoled Rajaliyar. When there was a gap, war drums and conches
were played.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, Parthibendran and Kandhanmaran were on pedigree
white Arabian steeds and led the procession. In the howdah of the Royal
elephant that followed were seated the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and
Sambuvaraiyar. Other chieftains followed them on elephants and horses. About a
hundred soldiers who carried a spear and held a sword in their waist walked in
between.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar saw Azhwarkkadian and the Doctor’s son. He stopped
the horse.

“Vaishnavite, are there any important messages from the Chief Minister?”

“Commander, he did not send any messages through me. But he is there at the
gate. He will convey the messages directly to you. But I have some disturbing
news for you.”

Azhwarkkadian paused.

“What ?”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran shouted in chorus.

“Vandhiya Thevan has escaped from the underground prison.”

“How can he? Is he a magician or what?”

“I smell some rat here. Somebody in power should have helped him.”

“It should be the work of that Kodumbalur Chieftain” – Kandhanmaran.

“Even if he had escaped he could not have gone out of the Fort. He should be
inside somewhere.”

“Kodumbalur Chieftain tells the same thing. Chief Minister ordered a search
around the Fort. He is particularly careful that the Kadambur clan should not be

disgraced.”

“There is at least one person to worry about our clan’s well being. To that extent
I am happy.”- Kandhanmaran.

“Tell me the truth, Vaishnavite. You go around the Fort to prevent their escape or
to aid it?” – It was Parthibendran who never had a good opinion of
Azhwarkkadian.

“If it is some other time I would have given a fiery retort. This is not the time for
personal fighting. This man, the Doctor’s son, has brought some strange news.
He tells me two people were going fast on their horses along the Vadavaaru
River. He is sure that one of them is Vandhiya Thevan and the other,
Karuthiruman. I too saw two men riding fast on horses.”

“Pinaakapani, is that true?” – Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“I promise.”

“Then why didn’t you tell that to the Chief Minister and the Kodumbalur
Chieftain?”

“They are terribly angry with me.”

“What for?”

“They think that I was the one who let them run away from the prison.”

“How could that happen?”

“Do you know about the mad man who had been saying that he knew where the
Pandya Crown and the opal necklace were kept? The Chief Minister sent me to
the Prison to bring him. When I was there those two men attacked me, had me
bound and ran away.”

“Of all the persons in the world should the Chief Minister choose a perfect idiot
like you for this sensitive job?” – Parthibendran said that and laughed.

The Doctor’s son was offended.

“I did not come here to make you laugh. If you can, please help me.”

“What help?”

“Send four horsemen with me. And give me a horse too. It will be my
responsibility to bring back the fugitives. I have successfully carried out the
assignments entrusted to me. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar knows about me.”

“What do you say, Parthibendra?” - Junior.

“We should help him. Emperor has entrusted me the great responsibility of
bringing you back to the Palace. Otherwise I will go with him. It is very
important that we should capture Vandhiya Thevan.”

Kandhanmaran jumped in.

“Leave that to me. I will go with him. Even if Vandhiya Thevan had entered the
gates of the house of death I will bring him back.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar agreed. He assumed the responsibility of explaining the
latest development to Sambuvaraiyar and others.

Seconds later Kandhanmaran, Pinaakapani and four armed soldiers were on
horses and were going at high speed along the northern banks of River
Vadavaaru.

Madhuranthakan was not used to horse-riding whereas Karuthiruman was an
expert rider. But he had been in jail for several years. He was weak and tired. In
spite of these there was great enthusiasm in the hearts of two men. That
enthusiasm gave them the strength to withstand the arduous journey.

They stopped only at midnight. They saw a make-shift bridge across the river. It
was made of bamboo poles. Karuthiruman was sure that they would be followed.
He thought it would be better if they crossed the river at that point and reached
the other bank. They could go along the Southern bank and then turn towards
Kodikkarai.

There was another reason to cross the river at that point. The river was flowing
to the brim. Madhuranthakan could not lead his horse across the river. But here
he could ask Madhuranthakan go first on foot. And he could lead both the horses
to the other side.

Madhuranthakan accepted the idea. Before crossing the river they wanted to
relax for some time. They sat on the roots of a large tree on the river-bank. The
river was flowing past them making a great noise. Noises of frogs were heard
from every where. The clouds cleared. Some stars appeared to do the work of a
spy, of looking at the two men seated under the tree.

Madhuranthakan was used to the pleasures of the Palace. He was used to
sleeping on the softest of beds. Sitting on the roots of tree at midnight exhausted
him. He was afraid of his future.

Karuthiruman read his mind and tried to comfort him. He told him that the
Lankan King Mahindan was the friend of Pandya King. If only Madhuranthakan
reached him then he need not have to worry. Karuthiruman said that he knew
where the Pandya crown and the opal necklace were kept. Mahindan might
perform a coronation ceremony at that place.

Meanwhile, he said, there would soon be a war among the Chieftains of Chozha
Empire. Other Chieftains would blame Sambuvaraiyar and Pazhuvettaraiyars of
murdering Vandhiya Thevan. As Madhuranthakan was not there now, the
Pazhuvettaraiyars would accuse Kodumbalur Chieftain of murdering
Madhuranthakan. Rumours would float that Prince Arulmozhivarman abetted
these murders in order to become the King. People would start hating him. When
the entire Chozha Kingdom was in chaos, the Lankan King would come with a
huge army to invade the Pandya Kingdom held by the Chozhas. He would
capture Madurai first. Madhuranthakan would be crowned for the second time in

Madurai. This would be a great affair. Madhuranthakan would be named
“Chozha Kulaanthaka Peruvazhuthi” - the King who was Death to the Chozhas.

When Karuthiruman was giving an emotional description of future
Madhuranthakan’s heart was bursting with pride. He had never been so
enthusiastic in his life. He even heard the war drums in his mind. He also heard
the music usually played during the coronation ceremony. Thousands of people
were raising slogans.

“Hail The Pandya Emperor!

“Hail The One Who Was Death to The Chozhas.”

When Madhuranthakan was building castles in the air the sound of horse hoofs
shattered his dreams. He could see torches at a distance. Karuthiruman never
thought people would catch up with them so soon. He urged Madhuranthakan to
go.

“Get up, Prince. Mount the horse. We will have to cross the river before they
reach here.”

Karuthiruman sprang on his horse. But Madhuranthakan could not do it so fast.
Karuthiruman thought fast.

“Please listen to me. You walk over the bridge and go to the other bank. I will
bring your horse also with me.”

“Do you think I am a coward? If I cannot cross this small river while riding a
horse, how will I cross the sea and reach Lanka? How can we capture the Pandya
Kingdom? How can I be crowned as a King?” Madhuranthakan slowly got on
his horse.

The two horses stepped down into the river. Just before getting down the river
Madhuranthakan’s horse bent its leg and tried to lie down on the ground.
Karuthiruman screamed. Somehow the horse managed to stand up and stepped
into water.

If Madhuranthakan was afraid he did not show.

“This is nothing. Why are you afraid?”

Perhaps Madhuranthakan’s horse was hurt. It did not move fast like the other
horse. Many times it tried to go along with the water flow downstream.
Madhuranthakan had a hard time directing the horse to the other bank. The
approaching horses were getting closer and closer as could be gauged by the
sound of horse-hoofs.

Till half way Karuthiruman was waiting for the Prince to follow him. Then he
had a flash. He asked Madhuranthakan to be brave. And went fast to the other
bank. He made his stop under a tree there. He jumped down from the horse and
ran across the bamboo bridge to the northern bank of the river. He had already
got the small knife from Madhuranthakan. He used that knife to cut the ropes
hanging from the bridge. He knotted them together and made it into a long rope.
He tied one end of the rope to the bridge and the other end to the trunk of a tree
on the other side of the river.

Nobody could see the rope in the dark. People who were coming fast on their
horses could never see the rope blocking their way. Once he finished the work he
thought of running back to the other side through the bridge. He changed his
mind and climbed up the tree and hid himself behind the thick branches.

Madhuranthakan’s horse had almost crossed the river. He just needed a few more
minutes to reach the other bank. From there it would be a fast, smooth ride. The
other horses had come near the bank. Two horses were on the lead. The horses
were hit by the rope and they fell face down.

Karuthiruman was happy that his plan worked. He laughed out aloud. One of the
horsemen who had fallen down heard the sound and screamed in fear “It’s a
ghost. A ghost.”

From the voice Karuthiruman recognised him as Pinaakapani. He was sad that
the idiot was still alive. It would have been better if he died in the fall.

The other horseman who fell down along with Pinaakapani got up. He was
unfazed. It was Kandhanmaran.

Chapter 66: Madhuranthakan’s Disappearance

Kandhanmaran fell headlong along with his horse. But he was undaunted. He
got up and armed himself with a spear. His attention went to the man on the
horse approaching the other bank. He was sure that it was Vandhiya Thevan.

Kandhanmaran’s sweet friendship with Vandhiya Thevan had now changed into
a bitter enmity. He thought that Vandhiya Thevan had cruelly betrayed him. He
was the one who brought unmitigated disgrace to the Sambuvaraiyar’s clan.
Whatever secrets he came to know while staying with him as a friend he had
broadcast to the whole world. He had even shared them with the members of the
King’s family. Why did he do that? Definitely not to prove his loyalty to the
Chozha clan; he wanted to win over their confidence and then betray them at an
opportune moment. Vandhiya Thevan had actually helped the former bodyguards
of the slain Pandya King Veerapandiyan to carry out their murderous plans.
What made him betray the Chozha clan and kill his own Master, Karikalan? Did
Nandini instigate him? Or did he do that for his personal gain?

It was true Kandhanmaran was also caught in Nandini’s net of seduction. Even
then he would not have thought of doing what Vandhiya Thevan had done. He
would not dare to do it even in the wildest of his dreams.

To crown them all Vandhiya Thevan had corrupted the mind of Kandhanmaran’s
sister Manimekalai. Even merely thinking of that made him furious.
Kandhanmaran’s dream had been to see his dear sister as the Empress of Chozha
Empire. He wanted her to marry Adithya Karikalan and lead the life of an
Empress. And that accursed Vandhiya Thevan’s evil influence had corrupted her
to such an extent that she was now telling everyone “ I killed Karikalan.”

Vandhiya Thevan was a crook, a rogue and a scoundrel – and that too the worst
variety. Kandhanmaran was firm that Vandhiya Thevan should not be allowed to
escape at any cost. Yes, it would be better to capture him alive. And if that was
not possible at least he should be killed. Kandhanmaran should return to
Thanjavur with the consoling thought of having settled his accounts with his
former friend, Vandhiya Thevan. These thoughts were in Kandhanmaran’s mind
when he left Thanjavur for the man hunt on that fateful night.

Kandhanmaran’s horse had fallen down. It might not survive the fall.
Pinaakapani’s horse had met with a similar fate.

‘Vandhiya Thevan’ had almost reached the other bank. It may take some time for
Kandhanmaran’s men to reach him. It would be impossible to cross the river
after they come and then capture the fugitive. Killing Vandhiya Thevan was a
much easier alternative.

All these thoughts flashed across Kandhanmaran’s mind in a few seconds. As
soon as he steadied himself he pressed his feet firmly on earth, aimed the spear
on the horseman and threw it with all his might.

The spear whizzed past at the speed of light and landed on Madhuranthakan. He
screamed and fell down in the river. His horse was trying to get up at the other
bank.

Karuthiruman froze. He was stunned by the sudden development. He trembled in
fear. His heart was racing. He never expected that to happen. He expected
something different.

The horse-riders chasing them came pretty fast; Karuthiruman thought that if
they had a sudden fall they could not stand up and even they did they could do
so only with broken limbs. Things happened so fast that Karuthiruman found it
hard to believe. One of the horse riders had thrown the spear and it had hit
Madhuranthakan and made him fall in the floods. Karuthiruman steadied himself
and jumped down screaming.

He hit Kandhanmaran with demoniac force. Kandhanmaran fell down. When he
moved a little away the Doctor’s son tried to block him. By that time
Pinaakapani’s fear of ghost had gone. He recognised the man on the tree as
Karuthiruman.

Karuthiruman saw in the idiot Pinaakapani an outlet for his pent-up fury. He
stabbed him with the knife in his hand, pushed him down and ran towards the
bridge. By that time the other horse-men had reached the place. They guessed
what had happened. They stopped the horses well before the treacherous ropes
that had made the lead horses fall down.

Kandhanmaran was still down. But he was fully conscious. He shouted: “Catch
the man who’s running over the bridge.”

The four horsemen dismounted and chased Karuthiruman.

Kandhanmaran had had a second headlong fall. It took some time for him to
recover from the shock. He lay there for some time. Then he steadied himself
and ran with his four men to capture Karuthiruman.

The Doctor’s son who had been stabbed by Karuthiruman could not control his

fury. He stood up and ran behind the other men over the bridge. But before he
could go six or seven feet his life energy faded away. He felt dizzy. His eyes
went dark. He could not stand. He staggered and then fell into the river. Nobody
saw him falling.

Poor soul, the Doctor’s son, Pinaakapani. None of his desires were fulfilled
when he died in that godforsaken place so unceremoniously. All the dream
castles he had built in his mind using his evil intentions as building blocks were
on that eventful day washed away in River Vadavaaru, which also became his
final resting place.

Karuthiruman attacked Kandhanmaran, stabbed the Doctor’s son and ran on the
make-shift bamboo bridge. After he had crossed three fourths of the bridge he
stopped and turned around. He found that the horsemen had dismounted and had
reached the bridge. He thought fast. He quickly surveyed the bamboo bridge.
Several bamboo poles were bound together in a strong rope. The poles were
supported by props that stood on the river bed. He cut the ropes that held the
poles. He also kicked the props that supported the bridge. He ran towards the
other end of the bridge. The bamboo poles were secured to the roots of a large
tree. He severed the ropes. He lifted the one end of the bridge and pushed them
into the river.

The next moment a third of the make-shift bamboo bridge was washed away by
the fast-flowing river.

The soldiers who were chasing Karuthiruman did not know that the bridge was
gone. They fell into the river one by one. Fortunately Kandhanmaran came last
and saw them falling. He stopped at the nick of time to avoid another fall.

Those who fell into the river drank water, struggled for air and finally managed

to come up.

Kandhanmaran ordered them to swim to the other bank. Two of the four
understood his words and started swimming. The other two swam against the
current came to the remaining portion of the bridge and held the bamboo poles
for their support. Kandhanmaran shouted at them for defying his orders. He
realised that there was no point in asking them to swim to the other shore. He
made them pull out some more bamboo poles from the fallen bridge and had
them made into a float. Kandhanmaran and the other two soldiers floated on it to
reach the other bank.

They met the two soldiers who had reached the other bank already. They told
him that the man had escaped into the darkness of the night even before they
reached the bank. They also heard the sound of two horses going. They told him
that there was no point in following the horses on foot. So they stopped there
waiting for his orders.

Kandhanmaran did not want to abort his mission at that point. He rightly guessed
that the mad man whom the Doctor’s son was about to release from prison must
have been the one who attacked and ran on the bridge. He was sure that he tied
the ropes on the way and climbed up the tree only to save Vandhiya Thevan.
There was no doubt that Vandhiya Thevan had been killed by his spear. He saw
Vandhiya Thevan falling from his horse headlong into the flowing river. But
Kandhanmaran wanted to see the lifeless body of his former friend. Only then he
would be satisfied about the success of his mission. Perhaps he could take
Vandhiya Thevan’s body to Thanjavur. He would be honoured by the Emperor
for killing a fugitive who had committed the highest act of treason against the
ruling Chozha clan. That would help to wipe the disgrace that had recently stuck
to his Sambuvaraiyar clan. The mere fact that Vandhiya Thevan tried to escape
from prison was more than enough to prove his guilt. So if he could establish
that Vandhiya Thevan killed Karikalan, Sambuvaraiyar’s clan need not have to
bear the burden of that guilt.

Kandhanmaran went east along the river bank followed by his four men. They
were looking for Vandhiya Thevan’s body which might have been washed
ashore by the flowing water. It was dark and they did not have any torches now.
It was a tough task. But Kandhanmaran did not lose hope. He walked ahead.
After he had walked a long distance he heard the sound of waterfalls.
Kandhanmaran walked to the source of that sound. A regulator had been built on
the river at that point. Water was collected that regulator and from there water
fell downward with tremendous force.

If Vandhiya Thevan’s body had followed the course of water then it would have
fallen from a great height to the valley down below. The body would have sunk.
It might take several days for the body to come up and float. Or the body might
not come up at all. There was no point in continuing the search beyond that
point.

When Kandhanmaran was about to abandon the search he saw a black object
being carried by the flowing water. Oh My God! That should be Vandhiya
Thevan’s body. A traitor was dead. May the Lord forgive his heinous sins. But
was it possible even for the loving Lord to forgive him? Yes, he would take
another birth to suffer for whatever sins he committed in this birth.

That was his fate. Vandhiya Thevan’s life had come to an end. Kandhanmaran
need not worry about him any more. Kandhanmaran decided to return to
Thanjavur to attend to other work.

Little did he know at that time that a great shock was waiting for him at
Thanjavur. How disappointed would he be when he came to know that the
person hit by his spear was Madhuranthakan and not Vandhiya Thevan. He
might even feel as if the earth holding him had given away and he was falling
into a never-ending abyss.

Chapter 67: “I Don’t Want This Earthly Kingdom”

When the stately procession of Pazhuvettaraiyars and the other Chieftains moved
away Azhwarkkadian and his men walked towards Amudhan’s house.
Madhuranthakan’s palanquin and his men were waiting for him near the garden.
Azhwarkkadian talked to them and found out that they had come back to collect
the Prince as per his orders. Azhwarkkadian entered the garden. He asked his
men to carefully scour the entire garden for any dangerous elements. He stood
at the entrance of the hut. He pressed his ear against the door and overheard the
conversation going on inside the hut. Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali
looked worried. Azhwarkkadian also heard somebody moaning in pain.

One of the men who had gone around the garden returned. Azhwarkkadian
examined the objects brought by that man in the small light that escaped from
inside the hut through the gaps in the door. Madhuranthakan’s crown, his jewel
and his epaulet, an ornament usually worn by men of Royal families on their
shoulders. There was also the silk cloth used by Madhuranthakan as his upper
garment. Azhwarkkadian was happy and satisfied.

“Ok, stop the search. Call the others. All of you stand here. Take out your
weapons. Be ready to use them anytime. There might be an emergency.”

He gently knocked the door. There was no response. He knocked again and
again, every knock stronger than the previous one...

“Who is that? What do you want?” Poonkuzhali’s voice was heard.

“I am Azhwarkkadian also known as Thirumalai Nambidasan. Please open the
door. I have something important to do.”

Footsteps were heard. Poonkuzhali came near the door. She did not open it. She
shouted:

“What important work can you have here in this place? You are a Vaishnava
fanatic. This hut belongs to a Shiva devotee. The man of the house is not well.
Why do you want to disturb us at this late hour?”

Azhwarkkadian’s retort was fearless.

“Yes, I am a Vaishnava fanatic. That was why I came here to annihilate the
enemies and save my friends. Open the door. Or else I will break it open. Your
call.”

“Are you such a great warrior, Oh Vaishnava? And you want to show your
valour to us, poor, helpless people?”

Poonkuzhali opened the door. Her eyes emitted fire. She wanted to vent out her
anger on Azhwarkkadian. She was shocked to find several armed men standing
behind him.

“What is this? Who are these people? Why have they come here? Have they
come with you?”

“Yes. They have come on His Majesty’s command. And whosoever obstructs
me from doing my duty, which of course I am doing on His Majesty’s command,
will be guilty of violating the Royal Decree. And will be punished suitably. Your
call.”

“Royal Decree! Suitable Punishment! I am fed up hearing words like these. I
dream of the day I will be hearing nothing but the sound of waves at my place
Kodikkarai and be happy and peaceful. Now, please ask others to stand away.
Please come in. The invitation is only for you and nobody else. I don’t know
what kind of His Majesty’s command can be done here in this hut. Whatever it
might be I am sure you can do it by yourself. If you invite the other men in, the
man of the house who is sick may be shocked. His already bad health will
deteriorate even further.

Azhwarkkadian entered the house and bolted the door.

“I am surprised, Poonkuzhali. From when did you start hating Government
work? What happened to your dream of marrying a Prince and sitting on the
throne? When you become the Empress you will have to spend all day attending
to Government work.”

“I have abandoned my dream, Vaishnavite. I now realise the full import of the
saying, ‘Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.’ I now know that being a King
and ruling over a country makes your heart sad and your life difficult. I won’t
come a mile near any throne, Vaishnavite. I want to share some happy news with
you. I have decided to marry my cousin Chendan Amudhan. I told this to
Sembianmadevi who came here a little while ago. We have got her blessings too.
As soon as Amudhan recovers we will move over to Kodikkarai to start a new
life.”

“Good decision, Poonkuzhali. I am reminded of a song by one of the Azhwars:

Surrounded by the celestial damsels
With the heavenly fortune in abundance
I don’t want to rule the skies
Or be a King on this earth
I will rather be a fish in the pond in the garden
In the temple of my Lord at Thiruppathi

In the same way you have abandoned this earthly kingdom and live with the
fishes in the sea. But who are we to decide that, Poonkuzhali? If it is your
husband’s destiny to bear a crown and rule the world that is bound to happen.
You cannot prevent it.”

“Please stop ridiculing our poverty. What made you come here?”

“My Lady, have you two just abandoned the desire to rule a Kingdom or have
you abandoned the desire to live on this earth? I came here only to know the
answer to this question.”

“Dumb question, Vaishnava. We surely want to live at least for some time. We
have decided to marry only today. Please bless us. Bless Amudhan that he may
recover soon.”

“I am ready to greet you both on this happy occasion. I want to bless you both.
At the same time I don’t want my greetings and blessings to go waste. If you
want to live for some more time why did you help some prisoners to escape from
the underground prison?”

Poonkuzhali was surprised and that clearly showed on her beautiful face.

“What is this? We never knew. We never helped anybody to escape from
prison.”

“Vandhiya Thevan, accused of killing Karikalan and another mad man who has
been in jail for several years have escaped. It appears they came up to this flower
garden. They have taken the horses from here and have fled the country. I see
blood drops on the floor near the hut. There are signs of several people having
visited this place. I have no option but to infer that you should have helped the
prisoners. The Chief Minister loves you; that was why he sent me to conduct a
gentle enquiry. If the Kodumbalur Chieftain’s men had come they would have
arrested you and would have thrown you in the same underground jail from
which the prisoners escaped.”

“We are grateful to the Chief Minister and you. My cousin Amudhan will
recover completely in a day or two. Then we will leave this place for good and
go to Kodikkarai. Then we will never come back to Thanjavur. You should make
sure that we are not disturbed by the Palace guards till we leave this place.”

“ I would love to help you, provided you tell the truth. The whole of it. Are you
sure there is nobody else but the three of you?”

“There is the fourth, you. A little while ago Sembianmadevi and
Madhuranthakan came to enquire about Amudhan’s health. Now that there are
several soldiers around the Thanjavur Fort we don’t know who else came here.
Let me answer your question. We did not help anybody to escape.”

“Is that true?”

“It is. We did not help anybody.”

“Then Vandhiya Thevan, who escaped from prison, should be in this hut. I am
quite sure.”

At the same time a moan was heard from under the cot of Chendan Amudhan.

Chapter 68: “Prince For A Day”

As soon as Azhwarkkadian heard the moaning sound from a place below
Amudhan’s cot he screamed: “Now I know. Gems among devotees of Shiva,
pious ones, like your Lord you too are well versed in deceit.”

He started to move towards the source of sound.

Poonkuzhali took the knife from her waist and flashed it threateningly against
the face of Azhwarkkadian.

“Vaishnava, now that you have insulted Lord Shiva you are not fit to live in this
world even for a second more. One more step you will directly reach the abode
of your Lord. Don’t tell me that I have not warned.”

“Ma, Maha Sakthi, have I ever spoken against your word? A seat in the abode of
Vaikunta is very difficult to get. If you promise to get it for me and that too with
your own hands... I can’t ask for anything more.”

Amudhan got up from his cot.

“No, Poonkuzhali. Don’t do that. Place the knife back in its place. If this
Vaishnavite insults Shiva he won’t be insulted. Nor will he take offence. No
good can happen through violence or deceit. Lying and cheating can never get us
good. Let us tell the truth to this Vaishnavite and ask for his help. Isn’t he after

all Vandhiya Thevan’s friend?”

“That is a good boy. Do you know that I am a devotee of Lord Krishna who is an
expert in deceit? Lord Shiva’s devotees can never deceive me. If only you
surrender unto the feet of our Lord Narayana He will by his boundless grace,
save you from all trouble. For didn’t he save the elephant Gajendra when he
screamed, “Oh, the primordial source of all beings” He saved the elephant from
the mouth of a crocodile. That’s my Lord for you.”

“You are right. But before your Lord could reach here from His abode Vaikunta,
your friend will leave this earth forever.”

Poonkuzhali ran up to the cot.

Others followed her. They lifted Vandhiya Thevan who was covered by a bundle
of clothes and placed him on bed.

Vandhiya Thevan was unconscious. But he was moaning continually. That was a
sure sign of life.

Amudhan’s mother Vani had boiled the herbs and added turmeric powder to
them. Azhwarkkadian and Amudhan held the limbs of Vandhiya Thevan. Vani
and Poonkuzhali placed the hot herbs on Vandhiya Thevan’s wound and then
bandaged it with a clean piece of cloth.

The pain was too much to bear for Vandhiya Thevan. He opened his eyes. He

saw Azhwarkkadian.

“Vaishnavite, you deceived me. You sent me here and sent someone to kill me.”

Vandhiya Thevan spoke these words and fainted again.

Azhwarkkadian was embarrassed. The words uttered by Vandhiya Thevan in a
semi-conscious state would make Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali doubt his
good intentions. He looked at their faces. He was pacified by the disarming
smile on Poonkuzhali’s face.

“Vaishnavite, did you send Vandhiya Thevan here?”

“I did. But I did not send anybody to kill him.”

“Let’s assume that you are speaking the truth. But whey did you send him
here?””

“I wanted him to escape from prison. I had even kept two horses for him and his
friend.”

“How did you know that he had not escaped? How did you know that he is
here?”

“I saw somebody else riding the horse I had kept for him. I had my doubts...”

“Vishnu thought of something; Lord Shiva thought of something else.”

“What is this puzzle, Devi? How was he hurt?”

“Vaishnavite, I don’t know what for you send Vandhiya Thevan here. But he
came at the right time and saved me from becoming a widow even before my
marriage.”

Azhwarkkadian and Chendan Amudhan were shocked.

“What? What are you saying?”

Poonkuzhali turned towards Amudhan.

“I did not even tell you. There was somebody outside waiting to throw a spear at
you. Vandhiya Thevan tried to block him and got the spear on himself.”

There were tears in Amudhan’s eyes.

“Oh My God! Was my dear friend hurt because of me?”

“So what? You faced several dangers and were hurt many times to save him.”

“Devi, it is rare to find people returning favours. In this bad world if people do
not hurt those who helped them that is a big deal. Vandhiya Thevan coming at
the right time to save the life of Amudhan is really a noble deed. But didn’t you
say something about marriage and widow?”

“Didn’t I tell you, that I and Amudhan have decided to marry? Didn’t I tell you
that Queen Mother came here to bless us? Within fifteen minutes after she left
this spear was ready to hit Amudhan. Even I could not have prevented it. If
something had happened to Amudhan, what would have been my condition? I
would have become a widow even before my marriage.”

“The grace of my loving Lord Vishnu will always be there for you. That would
not have happened. The blessings of that noble lady, the Queen Mother, would
not have gone in vain. You will marry this good man and will have many long
years of marital bliss. But who would have had the heart to hurt this soft,
innocent young man? Did you see him?”

“I did. I recognised him. He is that evil man, Pinaakapani, the Doctor’s son. He
was the one who captured my aunt Mandhakini from Kodikkarai and was thus
responsible for her death. Such atrocities have become common in Chozha
Empire these days.”

“You call this an atrocity? Atrocities which are thousand times worse are going
to happen in this Empire. The whole country will be in the grip of panic and
chaos from tonight. There is going to be a great civil war amongst the Chieftains.
They are going to fight with each other and die. Unless my Lord Sriman

Narayana conjures up a great miracle the country cannot be saved.”

Chendan Amudhan spoke to him.

“Vaishnavite, you talk as if you are cursing this great country. Why don’t you
bless it so that it may prosper and grow?”

Poonkuzhali was caustic.

“Let the country go to dogs. We are going to Kodikkarai.”

“We can go. But what do we do with this dear friend who saved my life?” –
Amudhan.

“Anyhow you cannot save him. Even if you decide to stay here he can’t be
saved. Soldiers are out in all the four directions to find out those who escaped
from prison. They will also come here. I don’t know what excuses I can I give to
the soldiers I brought with me.” - Azhwarkkadian

Poonkuzhali tried to placate Azhwarkkadian.

“Vaishnavite, you are very smart. Even the Chief Minister listens to your advice.
Please show us a way to save the life of Vandhiya Thevan. You will be blessed.
We will be grateful to you forever.”

“Devi, that’s not very easy.”

“I have a doubt. I only noticed that now. Till yesterday you called me a boat-girl.
You used to address me almost in a derogatory manner. Now you call me Devi. I
can see a kind of reverence. I won’t be surprised if you call me Princess after a
while.”

“Yes, Princess. There is only one way to save this valiant young man. This lucky
man who is going to marry you should act as a Prince for just one day. If he
becomes the Prince then naturally you become the Princess.”

Amudhan intervened.

“Vaishnavite, why are you keen on making fun of me? How can I be a Prince?
And for what?”

“Let me share a secret. First see this.”

Azhwarkkadian unpacked a small bundle and showed its contents to them.

They saw Madhuranthakan’s princely crown, jewels and epaulets.

“This was worn by Prince Madhuranthakan. We saw him wearing it.”

“How did you get these things?”

“They were scattered near the fence. Let me now share the secret. When I was
coming along the banks of River Vadavaaru I saw two men riding fast on their
horses. I recognised the horses. I left them here for Vandhiya Thevan and the
mad man. I am sure, Amudhan, you know the mad man.”

“I do. He was ranting about the Pandya crown and the opal necklace to everyone
who cared to listen.”

“You are right, the same man. He was on one of the horses. It seemed that Prince
Madhuranthakan was on the other horse. But I was not sure. But when I came
here that was confirmed.”

“Quite surprising. Whey should Madhuranthakan abandon his jewels and run
away?”

“I don’t know. I am going to talk to the Chief Minister and send men to go after
him. But before that, I am afraid, many disasters may happen here in this place.”

“What disasters?”

“Pazhuvettaraiyars and the chieftains on his side are approaching the Fort.
Kodumbalur Chieftain, Malaiyaman and the Chief Minister are waiting at the
gates to receive them. The Emperor wants to have peaceful negotiations on the

issue of succession. But before Pazhuvettaraiyars begin their peace talks the first
question they would ask is “Where is Madhuranthakan?” If he is not found they
will spring on the Kodumbalur Chieftain. They will say that Madhuranthakan
has been killed so that Ponniyin Selvan becomes the King. The Chieftain might
refute the charge. But he won’t be able to prove his innocence. That will lead to
a great civil war. Our Chozha Empire will be destroyed.”

“We’ll leave the place before that happens.”

“That is impossible, Devi.”

“Then what do you suggest?”

“Let Amudhan wear this crown and these jewels for sometime. I have brought
the elephant which Ponniyin Selvan used to ride into the Fort. Let Amudhan get
into the elephant. I will make my men shout “Hail Prince Madhuranthakan” and
walk with the elephant. Madhuranthakan’s palanquin is also here. We shall place
Vandhiya Thevan in it and pull on the screens. You walk by the side of the
palanquin. I will take care of the rest.”

“An outrageous suggestion.”- Amudhan

“Do you think that simply because he has a crown people won’t find him out?”

“Devi, its night. He is going to be on an elephant. Again, people will look deeply
only when they suspect something. I am going to come with you. I will take you

all to the safety of Chief Minister’s house. There is no other way to save
Vandhiya Thevan.”

They discussed for some time. Finally Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali
consented.

Chapter 69: “A Sword For A Sword”

When the retinue of Pazhuvettaraiyars, Sambuvaraiyar and the other Chieftains
approached the gates of the Fort it looked as if a great ocean was about to meet
another.

“The Chancellor of Exchequer, The Sole Taxation Authority Of Chozha
Kingdom, the great warrior who sustained sixty-four wounds in thirty-four
battles, the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar is coming. Give way.”

Other chieftains were greeted by the heralds in a similar manner. On the other
side the heralds were busy singing the praises of the Kodumbalur Clan and
Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman. The sound of drums and conches echoed against the
walls of the mighty Fort.

The Kodumbalur Chieftain, Malaiyaman and the Honourable Chief Minister
were standing at the gates to welcome the visitors. To honour the protocol the
visiting dignitaries had to get down from their horses and elephants. Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar thought that the Kodumbalur Chieftain and others were waiting
at the Fort only to escort them inside the Fort with respect appropriate to their
station. He requested the other visitors to leave him the responsibility of talking
to Kodumbalur Chieftain and others.

Kodumbalur Chieftain and others thought they might have to talk with the
visiting dignitaries for some time. So they did not block the way. They stood a
little aside in the adjoining ground. As soon as the visitors came near them the
Chieftain welcomed them whole-heartedly:

“ Most Welcome, my dear Chieftains! Like the legendary eight elephants that
bear the world you bear the Chozha Empire. Most welcome, Chieftains. May
your visit bring glory to the Chozha Empire and the Chozha Clan.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was in a mood to sting.

“Yes, General. May our coming bring glory to the Empire. And may your going
away bring glory to the Empire.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain’s eyes became red in fury. He roared to Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“You are right, Junior. It has been the practice of the Kodumbalur Chieftains to
go in all the four directions to enhance the glory of the Empire. My younger
brother thus went to Srilanka and lost his life in defending the glory of the
Empire. The whole world knows about his sacrifice. I too was in Lanka till a few
days ago. Our clan does not know the art of riding a horse inside a pot – I mean
the fine art of staying within the four walls of the palace, looking after the
treasury and the ladies’ chambers. If your coming and my going can usher in the
glory of this great Empire I won’t stay here even for a second more.”

The Chief Minister came between the two to extend the olive branch to the
warring chieftains.

“Oh Descendants of great Kings, the Empire will surely prosper on all of you
coming here. There is no doubt about it. Each one of you had only the welfare of

the Chozha Empire at heart and has slogged for generations to defend the
Empire. In every clan that is represented here at least somebody has sacrificed
their lives for the Empire. The Empire requires your support and co-operation in
future as well. That is why our Emperor Sundara Chozhan is upset about the
disharmony in your midst. The Emperor has even set aside his grief of
bereavement and has invited you all for negotiations. We can discuss everything
including the issue of succession in the presence of the Emperor. Let us discuss
in peace in an atmosphere of harmony and friendship. Dear Kings and
Chieftains, I have but one prayer to you. The Emperor is already grieving over
the death of his son. Don’t try to add to his pain by quarrelling amongst
yourselves in his presence.”

The words appealed to everyone assembled there. They all realised that it was
not the time to vent out their personal grievances.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar spoke on behalf of all the visiting Chieftains.

“Chief Minister, we are ready to honour the wishes of our Emperor. When can
we meet him? Can we see him tonight? We are anxious to know about his wishes
directly from him.”

“That is fair enough, Commander. I am sure your wishes will be honoured in
letter and in spirit. But you know about our Emperor’s health and the state of his
mind. He suffers more during the nights. Again before talking to Chieftains the
Emperor wants to discuss the issue of succession with Sembianmadevi for one
final time. Our Emperor is trying his best to change her mind. You know the
reason. Our Emperor will call you before tomorrow evening. He wants all of you
to come in and rest peacefully in your respective palaces for the night. He has
ordered Kodumbalur Chieftain to oversee the accommodation and other
arrangements for you all.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar intervened again.

“Chief Minister, we do not need palaces to stay for the night. We are used to
sleeping in open grounds during wartime. If the Emperor is sure to see us
tomorrow, why should we enter the Fort tonight?”

“What’s the reason for your staying outside when you have your own palace
inside the Fort?”

Kodumbalur Chieftain added fuel to the fire.

“Perhaps Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar is afraid of staying inside the Fort.”

“You mean fear? How will it look like? Red or black? Will it have horns or
wings? Perhaps the Kodumbalur Chieftain who ran away from the Lankan
battlefield may know better.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was clearly annoyed.

‘How am I going to prevent a conflict between these two?’-thought the Chief
Minister.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar grunted so loudly that it echoed against the skies. He
came forward to talk. There was look of awe and respect in everybody’s face.

“Thambi, Kodumbalur Chieftain hails from the clan of King Pari, the greatest
philanthropist the world has even known. The clan is known for its integrity. For
them a word given is a word given. When Kodumbalur Chieftain has promised
to provide security for us, what prevents us from staying inside the Fort for the
night?”

“Anna, We do not need anybody’s protection. We don’t need anybody’s word to
save ourselves. We have our swords and the spears of thirty thousand men. I
have been the Commander of this Fort. I won’t step inside the Fort till it comes
back to my control.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain spoke to Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar:

“I am waiting for the Emperor’s command. I am ready to give back the Fort
anytime.”

“Did he capture the Fort with the Emperor’s orders?” – Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar

“No, with the power of my sword.” – Kodumbalur Chieftain

“Then I will regain it with the power of my sword. I am ready for a test, right
now.” Junior’s hand went towards his sword.

Senior blocked him.

“ Thambi, this is not the time for the sword. Let us not forget that we have come
here at the invitation of the Emperor.”

“Anna, what is the guarantee, that he will not arrest us the moment we step into
the Fort? He captured the Fort without waiting for the Emperor’s orders. How
can we trust him?”

Senior provided sane counsel to his brother.

“You trusted him, left our families inside the Fort and came out. You have even
left Prince Madhuranthakan to his care.”

“I now think, it might have been a blunder, Anna. If anything happens to
Madhuranthakan I will annihilate the Kodumbalur Clan.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain lost his temper at this moment. A nasty duel appeared
inevitable. They were all distracted by the buzz of activity at the gates of the
Fort.

The Chief Minister had gone to see Azhwarkkadian who had asked him to come
by sign language. He shared some secret news with him. The Chief Minister
then walked back to the place where the Pazhuvettaraiyars and others were
standing. The Minister heard what Junior had to say on Madhuranthakan.

“Commander, why do you worry about Madhuranthakan? Nobody can harm

him. Some time ago Madhuranthakan and his mother Sembianmadevi went out
of the Fort. They had gone to see Chendan Amudhan who serves the Shiva
Temple.”

“Yes, I know. The mother and the son went out; but only the mother came back.”
– Junior.

“How do you know?” – Chief Minister

“Minister, I too have intelligent spies. I want to know why Prince
Madhuranthakan has not yet come back.”

The Chief Minister smiled. As if on cue they heard the slogan:

“Hail Prince Madhuranthakan.”

Everybody turned towards the direction of the sound. ‘Prince Madhuranthakan’
was seated atop an elephant. His princely crown adorned his head. He was
bedecked with the traditional jewels. A closed palanquin trailed
‘Madhuranthakan’s’ elephant.

The Chief Minister addressed Junior in a majestic voice.

“Commander, Madhuranthakan’s re-entry into the Fort was delayed. Vani’s son
Chendan Amudhan had a fall from a horse and is severely injured.

Sembianmadevi ordered that Amudhan be brought inside the Fort in a palanquin.
Madhuranthakan is carrying out his mother’s orders. He is riding on an elephant
letting Amudhan come in his palanquin. He may have to ride the elephant while
taking part in the procession for his coronation. Perhaps this is a kind of
rehearsal for that occasion.”

Chapter 70: Security At The Fort

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar carefully watched the elephant and the palanquin
entering the Fort.

“Quite surprising.”- He said.

“What’s surprising?” – Chief Minister.

“I have never seen Prince Madhuranthakan entering the Fort with so much
fanfare. He is a shy person. Even when he travels by palanquin he will have the
screens pulled in.””

“He has to get rid of shyness someday. Isn’t he going to be crowned soon?”

“Hasn’t been decided to crown Madhuranthakan? Who decided that?”

“Who else could decide but our Emperor? When we all go to him and give our
consent...”

“What is the big deal, Minister, of the Emperor deciding and our consenting to
his decision? The Kodumbalur army should accept. It’s sheer bliss to see
Madhuranthakan happily riding on an elephant and going into the Fort guarded

by Kodumbalur men at present.”

He walked a few steps towards the elephant. Then he changed his mind and
came back.

He spoke to his brother:

“Anna , you can all go into the Fort. I am not going to stop you. But I can’t
come. Till yesterday the Fort was under my command. Now I cannot enter it
when somebody else is in charge. I cannot subject myself to somebody else’s
command. My heart won’t let me do that. You meet the Emperor and find out
what’s in his mind. Till then I will be outside. I will stay with our army.
Kandhanmaran has gone in search of Vandhiya Thevan. I am anxious to know
what news he was going to bring us. I want to know how Vandhiya Thevan
escaped from the underground prison and who helped him. Please forgive me.
You may all get into the Fort.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain wanted to say something. Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar
intervened.

“General, this fool has lost his mind. Let him be stay wherever he lies. Come,
let’s go. We have a lot to do.”

The Emperor did not accept the stand taken by Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. The
Emperor insisted that Junior should also be present during the deliberations.

“Dear Commanders, I trust every one of you. But of all my men I trust the
Commander of Thanjavur Fort, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Why hasn’t he come?
Till he comes we can’t do anything.”

Senior spoke reverentially.

“Your Majesty, please forgive me. My brother will accept whatever decision I
take here. So there is no need for him to be present here in person.”

“Chancellor, your brother is to you what Lakshman was to Lord Rama. The
whole world knows that Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar has come to Thanjavur. Why
hasn’t he come here? He was present in all the cabinet meetings I held in the
past. We have never taken any decision of importance without consulting him.
Why should that intelligent warrior refuse to come now?”

“Your Highness, please let me answer your question. “ Chief Minister.

“Yes.”

“I am extremely sorry to say this, Your Majesty. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar now
defies his own brother. We told him that Your Highness has personally invited
him. His brother Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar tried his best to convince him. Even
then he refused to come.”

Parthibendran intervened.

“Let us not forget that he has promised to accept whatever decision we take in
this meeting.”

“But why should he refuse to come? Does he suspect something?”

“For the frightened ones whatever is dark appears as a ghost. Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar suspects everything now. He is doubtful whether
Madhuranthakan is safe here. He suspects foul play in Vandhiya Thevan
escaping from the underground prison.”

“There will surely be grounds for his suspicion. “ – Emperor.

These words were followed by a deep silence. The thoughts of those assembled
there went in many directions. Finally Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar cleared his throat
and made a submission.

“Your Majesty, my brother’s suspicion may be well-founded or not. I don’t want
to blame him either. Let me tell you the real reason for his not coming in. This
Fort has been under his command for several years. Now the command has
shifted to the hands of Kodumbalur Chieftain. My brother says he can’t enter the
Fort that is in somebody else’s command. What can we do for his
impetuousness, Your Majesty?”

“We can do justice.”- retorted the Emperor. Silence reigned again.

The Emperor virtually roared.

“Ministers and Chieftains, the unimpeachable reputation of the Chozha clan is
founded on the principles of justice and fairness adhered to by the Chozha
monarchs. One of my ancestors killed his own son because the son had
inadvertently killed a calf with his chariot wheel. You know history. If a cow
could get this kind of justice from the Chozha monarch imagine the kind of
justice that would have been rendered to the people. If ordinary people got this
kind of justice imagine what kind of justice the King’s commanders and
Generals, who help the King in his governance, would have got. Why should I
deviate from the ancient tradition and bring disgrace to my clan? Kodumbalur
Chieftain ought not to have got the command of this Fort by force. I was
grieving for the death of my son and hence had overlooked the injustice meted
out to Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. I now request the General to give back the charge
of this Fort to Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain’s face fell. Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman came in to defend
him.

“Your Highness, when Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was in charge of this Fort he did
not properly discharge his responsibilities. A conspirator had sneaked into the
Fort, had come up to the ladies’ chambers and threw a spear on the Emperor. A
mute woman had to intervene to save your life. If she had not come at that time..
my heart trembles to imagine what would have happened. What is the point in
holding hundreds of swords and spears, if we cannot prevent an assailant from
entering the Fort? What is the big deal in employing so many soldiers and the
warriors of the Velakkara Force when they cannot defend the King’s life at the
right time? How can we say that Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar did his duty? What is
wrong in Kodumbalur Chieftain capturing the Fort from him?”

The Emperor now spoke to his father-in-law in a soft voice.

“Mama, who can be blamed for Destiny’s fault? In spite of your best efforts you
could not save your dear grandson. There were many people with you. And you
all tried your best. And yet you couldn’t do anything.”

“We need to hold an enquiry on Karikalan’s death as well, Emperor. We have not
yet investigated what happened at Kadambur. Truth has not yet come out. At
least not yet.”- Malaiyaman.

“We were waiting for the arrival of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Now that he has
come we can hold the enquiry soon.” – Kodumbalur Chieftain.

“Before the commencement of a proper enquiry how could Vandhiya Thevan
escape from the high security underground prison? Who is going to take
responsibility for that security lapse? The enquiry should cover that as well.” –
Parthibendran.

“I heard that, General. How did he escape from prison? Who is going to take the
responsibility?” – Emperor

“Your Majesty, only the Chief Minister can answer that question.”- Kodumbalur
Chieftain.

“Your Majesty, I take the full responsibility. Vandhiya Thevan escaped because
of a mistake I committed. I will take the responsibility of bringing him back
here. And if I fail I am ready to accept due punishment.” – Chief Minister

“Before Chief Minister could take responsibility for that lapse my friend
Kandhanmaran has taken the responsibility of bringing back Vandhiya Thevan.
He has gone behind Vandhiya Thevan.” – Parthibendran.

There were only two women in the hall. One was Empress Vanamadevi and the
other was Princess Kunthavai.

When Kunthavai heard that Kandhanmaran has gone behind Vandhiya Thevan
lines of grief and worry clouded her beautiful face. But for the Chief Minister
nobody noticed the sudden change in her expression.

Chief Minister now spoke to Parthibendran more for the benefit of Princess
Kunthavai.

“Pallava Prince, your friend Kandhanmaran is no doubt smart. But we can’t trust
him with a task like this. He could not save the life of Karikalan, the darling of
Chozha Empire, who was staying in Kandhanmaran’s own palace. How can he
capture Vandhiya Thevan who has escaped from prison? I don’t think so.”

Chief Minister did not fail to notice that Princess Kunthavai understood the
import of what he said.

“I heard that Kandhanmaran and Vandhiya Thevan are close friends.”Kodumbalur Chieftain.

“They were, a long time back, Your Highness. Anybody who betrays the Chozha

clan can never be friends with the Sambuvaraiyar clan.” – Sambuvaraiyar.

“Why should we discuss that now? The Chief Minister has taken up the
responsibility of bringing Vandhiya Thevan back. Kodumbalur Chieftain should
now give back the charge of the Fort to Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.” – Emperor.

“If that’s the Royal decree I am ready and willing to obey it right now.” –
Kodumbalur Chieftain’s intonation betrayed the seething anger in his heart.

The Emperor now placated Kodumbalur Chieftain.

“Kodumbalur Mama! You are older to me both in age and experience. I love you
like I love my own father. Who am I to issue orders to you? I just voiced out my
opinion. Let us know what others think on this subject and then take a decision.”

“I am not for it, Emperor. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar has miserably failed in his
duty. So we should not entrust the Fort to him.”- Malaiyaman.

“What does the Chief Minister think?”- Emperor.”

“What has happened has happened. There will be some practical difficulties in
changing the command now. Your Highness has invited us all to settle the issue
of discussion. Let that be our first priority. Once that is decided it is very easy to
decide on the security of the Fort.” – Chief Minister.

“We can’t decide without Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Chancellor, what is your
take?” – Emperor.

“I endorse the views of Malaiyaman. My brother has failed in his duty. He has
not properly discharged his responsibilities. So there is no need to entrust the
command back to him now.” – Senior.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s love for his brother was well known. Seen against that
background every one was surprised by his words. The assembly was even more
surprised, why even shocked, by what the Emperor said next.

“Chancellor, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar did not fail in his duty. We – I mean you
and me – neglected his advice. Everybody assembled here, please listen to me.
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had been often cautioning me against the former body
guards of Pandya Kingdom. He even warned me that those blackguards have
some connections inside the Fort. He insisted that the security in the Palace,
especially the ladies’ chambers should be tightened. He wanted to seal the secret
passage that connects the Chancellor’s palace and mine. You know that Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar worships his brother. In spite of that he complained against his
own elder brother. He told me that his brother was being deceived by people.
And that he suspected that the conspirators sneak into the Palace often. He even
suggested that the palace of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar be shifted to some other
place. The underground treasury should also be moved to a safer place. I didn’t
listen to him.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar cleared his throat. Emperor stopped talking. Senior now
spoke in a voice drained of all emotions.

“Your Highness, you did not reveal certain things out of your love for me. I
know your heart. You do not want to insult me. But let me bare my heart, Your

Highness. I was caught in the seductive net of Nandini and married her. My
brother warned me against that witch several times. He specifically warned me
that the head of Pandya Kings body-guards was regularly visiting my wife in the
guise of a sorcerer. I was at that time blinded by lust. I did not listen to the
words of my brother. Even then I would say that he failed in his duty. When he
knew for sure he ought to have killed my wife and those conspirators. If I tried
to save them he should have killed me as well. He did not do that. Hence he
failed in his duty.”

The assembly trembled in excitement. Senior’s words were packed with so much
agony that everyone became heavy.

The Emperor now pacified Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“Please wait, Chancellor. I also know that your brother is capable of killing
anybody who stands in the way of his duty, even if it is his own brother or his
wife. But I prevented him from doing his duty. I barked at Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar, “If you are going to complain against your brother or his wife,
don’t ever come into my presence.” I refused his brilliant idea of shifting your
palace elsewhere and bring the Velakkara Force there. ' What was the great deal
in living a life of fear ', I asked him. Why should I save myself? The agony in
my mind and the ailment in my body made me hate my life. Pazhuvur Mama,
neither you nor your brother is in any way responsible for whatever happened to
me and my clan. I asked for it and I got.”

An endless stream of tears was flowing out of the eyes of Senior.

“Yes, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar is blameless. When Vandhiya Thevan first came
here he warned me. He told me that Vandhiya Thevan spoke secretly to my
Junior Queen outside the gates of the Fort. He suspected that he might be an

accomplice to the enemies of this Empire. He also told me that Vandhiya Thevan
entered the Fort showing Pazhuvur’s signet ring. He also told me that he should
have gone out of the Fort only through the secret passage from the Pazhuvur
Palace. I ignored him. Even our wise Chief Minister, why even my smart
daughter, Princess Kunthavai were taken for a ride. They sent very important
messages through Vandhiya Thevan.”

Chief Minister spoke now.

“Emperor, I might have been deceived but not the Princess. She did send
message through Vandhiya Thevan. But she also requested me to have an eye on
him. I sent my disciple Azhwarkkadian to Srilanka asking him to trail Vandhiya
Thevan up to Kancheepuram.”

“Let us assume that you two were not deceived by him. But Vandhiya Thevan
and another person have escaped from the underground prison. Nobody can deny
that. Had the Fort been under the control of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar this would
not have happened at all. They could not have escaped. General, call Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar and entrust the Fort to him. You can even consider this as my
command.”

“As you please, Your Majesty. So can we take leave of you now?”-Kodumbalur
Chieftain.

The fury in Kodumbalur Chieftain’s heart had come down. The compassion
shown by the Emperor towards the Pazhuvettaraiyars, the Emperor’s large heart
in condoning their lapses had melted his heart. He appeared more stunned than
furious.

“Yes, all of you can go now. When Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar comes in let us
resume the assembly. I too need some time to discuss the issue of succession
with the Queen Mother.” – Emperor.

When everybody was leaving Parthibendran presented a petition to the Emperor.

“Your Majesty, Chief Minister has taken on himself the responsibility of
bringing back that traitor and betrayer of friends, Vandhiya Thevan. I want to
remind him of his responsibility. Anybody can forget the untimely death of the
Crown Prince. But I, his dear friend, cannot. We will have to punish the traitor
who was responsible for the death of Adithya Karikalan.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar cleared his throat which resembled a lion’s roar. It
appeared as if he wanted to say something. He changed his mind and walked
away. Others followed him.

On the same evening the command of the Fort was given back to Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. At first he refused to accept the charge. He objected. He even
expressed his doubt that there might be some conspiracy in this sudden change.
Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar convinced his brother that it was the Emperor’s direct
command and that he had no option but to obey.

But for a few all Kodumbalur soldiers were sent out of the Fort. Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men resumed their positions. This also led to minor conflicts
and altercations between the soldiers of Pazhuvur and Kodumbalur.

“Hail Ponniyin Selvan!”

“Hail Prince Madhuranthakan!”

These slogans alternated with each other. The people of the country took part in
shouting slogans. They started taking sides.

In the next three days the entire Empire was in the grip of chaos and confusion.
Fight between the two factions started as a wordy duel, became a fight and
deteriorated into an armed fight. People used sticks, swords and spears to fight
with their rival factions.

A few days ago Chozha Empire was devastated by storm and floods. Now a
worse calamity, an unprecedented storm of fury spread all over the nation. It
caused large scale destruction and even threatened the stability of the Chozha
Empire.

Chapter 71: The King Born of Her Blessed Womb

Emperor Sundara Chozhan sent word to the Queen Mother that he wanted to see
her. She came down to see him only after several requests. The Emperor went to
the gates of his palace to receive her. He made her sit by his side on the throne.

“Oh King of Kings, I have been listening to one sad news after the other in the
recent past. I am deeply hurt. But in the midst of all these tragic developments I
am happy to see the improvement in your health. May you live long and save
this world. May my Lord continue to bless you with good health, peace and
prosperity.”

“Queen Mother, I think you refer to my legs which have now regained the
capacity to walk. I am quite happy about it. The whole Chozha Empire
worships you as a goddess. In the past when you came to see me I could not
stand up and receive you at the gates and give you due reverence. It was because
of the love of a goddess who cannot speak or hear that I got back my legs. And
because of her I had the good fortune of walking up to the gates to receive you,
Ma and accord you a welcome which you very richly deserve. Thanks for your
blessings, Ma. But honestly I am not happy to be alive. I don’t want to live long.
Please don’t bless me with long life. Instead bless me that I should attain the feet
of Lord Shiva soon.”

“Emperor, all your ancestors died either a valiant death on the battle-field or
attained the Lord’s feet after years of good rule and service to people. They
would have secured a seat for you in heaven. At the right time my Lord’s angels
will come to take you their place. But you should not be in a hurry to go away
from this world. You still have a lot to do in this world. People are happy under
your fair and just rule. Work on Shiva Temples is going on all over the Kingdom.
People of all religious denominations – Saivites, Vaishnavites, Buddhists and

Jains – have but one prayer on the top of their minds – that you should live
long.”

“Ma, let them not pray for my long life hereafter. If my life is lengthened so will
be my grief. Having lost the greatest of warriors of this empire, having lost my
first born, Adithya Karikalan, I don’t want to live any longer in this world. I
should have died before him, Ma.”

“Emperor, losing one’s child is the greatest grief one can have. You don’t need
this ordinary woman to lecture on the powers of Destiny. Lord Krishna was
Arjuna’s best friend. Krishna, as you know, was an incarnation of the God of
Protection, Lord Vishnu. Even then he could not save Arjuna’s sons Aravan and
Abimanyu from death. Didn’t Arjuna live after the death of his sons? He loved
his children. Lord Krishna advised him, ‘In order to save the world you will have
to save yourself.’ Arjuna obeyed the Lord, lived in this world and even fought a
holy war. What the Lord told Arjuna applies to you, Emperor.”

“Ma, Abimanyu’s death was different. He died a warrior’s death at the battlefield and he reached the highest of heavens reserved for fearless warriors.”

“Your son is no less than Abimanyu. The world shall never forget Karikalan’s
acts of valour at the Sevur Battlefield when he was just twelve, and later in the
final war with Veerapandiyan when he was just eighteen. In the Mahabharata
war cowards surrounded Abimanyu, disarmed him and killed him against all the
principles of Dharma. It was an unfair attack. In the same way Adithya
Karikalan was isolated and was lured into a trap and was killed by those
cowards, the bloody conspirators.”

“Queen Mother, if only I know how he died I will be at peace.”

“Please don’t bother about what has happened. Karikalan’s life in this world was
over. The comet fell down from the sky. The country lost one of its greatest sons,
the bravest of warriors our country has ever seen. What can we gain by an
enquiry?”

“Nobody knows the truth. I have started doubting everybody around me. Like
the legendary five-headed snake which is supposed to bear this world, Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar bears this Empire. People cast aspersions on him. Many say
that he too had a hand in Karikalan’s murder.”

“Why don’t you ask him on his face?”

“Who has the heart to question him? I don’t, Ma. His name has already been
dragged into this controversy. He is quite upset about it. Unless he himself
comes out with what actually happened on that day, who can ask him? You
might not have forgotten what happened in Thakkolam Battlefield. My father’s
brother Rajadithyan fought bravely and lost his life while still remaining seated
atop an elephant. The Chozha Army lost the enthusiasm to fight and started
fleeing the war-front. Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar stopped the soldiers who were
running for their lives, consolidated our army and defeated the mighty army of
King Kannara Deva. If he had not done that there won’t be any Chozha Empire
today. In that battle Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar sustained sixty four wounds. He did
not mind them. He fought till the end and made us victorious. We saw his
wounds and out of our love and gratitude, ordered him not to venture into any
battlefield thereafter, and made him the Chancellor of Exchequer. He is like my
father, Ma. Tell me how can I ask him about his involvement in my son’s
death?”

“Is there no other way to know the truth?”

“They say that Vandhiya Thevan was near the body of Karikalan. I thought I will
know the truth from him. But he has escaped from jail. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar
has grounds to accuse the Chief Minister.”

Kunthavai who had been silently observing the conversation now intervened.

“Father, Chief Minister has taken the responsibility of producing Vandhiya
Thevan before the Royal Court.”

“My dear child, Chief Minister has taken many responsibilities in the past. But
he has not fulfilled most of them. I hear that Sambuvaraiyar’s son
Kandhanmaran has gone after Vandhiya Thevan. Kandhanmaran is a rash fellow.
He is incapable of clear thinking. His only anxiety is that the name of
Sambuvaraiyar’s clan should be cleared. He is furious over Vandhiya Thevan. I
am really worried that he has gone to capture Vandhiya Thevan.”

Queen Mother spoke:

“Emperor, let us forget the past and think about the future.”

“You said what is in my mind, Ma. That is why I sent for you – several times.
Queen Mother, you should guide me in this hour of crisis.”

“Emperor, you have many Ministers and General, all of whom are known for
their intelligence. What can this silly woman advise you? So long as the great

man who married me and made my life holy, was alive I never interfered in
political affairs. After he left me alone in this world I have been doing nothing
but serving my Lord Shiva. How can I advise you, Emperor?”

“Queen Mother, please don’t mistake me. No woman of our Chozha clan can be
called ‘silly woman’. Look at this girl, my daughter, Kunthavai. I have never
seen anybody equal to her in intelligence.”

“Please pardon me, Emperor. I was not born in Chozha clan. I was born of the
Mazhavaraiyar Clan.”

“Women born in any clan can be intelligent. They can do good to the country of
their birth and the country they are married into. I have seen many clans
perishing because of the obstinacy of the women of that clan. Mother, I don’t
want you to be the reason for the destruction of this ancient clan.”

Queen Mother was startled that she jerked violently as if she stepped barefoot on
a live flame.

“Emperor, what are you saying? Do you mean to say that the Chozha clan will
be destroyed because of me? For starters, I am not that powerful, Emperor.”

Sembianmadevi broke into a sob.

“Devi, I was a little harsh. Please forgive me. The thought that my son is dead
and I am still alive rends my heart. There is only one thing which can give me

more grief. If this great Chozha Empire which had been grown and fortified by
generations of valiant kings were to break away into small fiefdoms and
shattered during my time, well, that for me will be a harsher punishment than
losing my son at his prime age. I did not see my first born Adithya Karikalan for
the last three years. He built a golden palace for me at Kanchi and had been
inviting me to stay there. I cited my bad health as an excuse and declined the
invitation. But you know, Ma, that was not the real reason. If I left for Kanchi
Pazhuvettaraiyars may think that I have lost faith in them. Other chieftains and
officials might think so. I knew that such a thought will be harmful for the
stability of the Chozha Empire. That was why I did not go to Kanchi. If only I
had gone my son Karikalan would not have died.”

“Oh King of Kings, you are very intelligent. You are valiant and have powers.
Even then you cannot change what has been written by the cruel hand of
Destiny.”

“Yes, Ma, you are right. I could not have changed what Destiny willed for me
and my children. But the pity is I could not see my son during his final days. I
never had the chance to know what was in is mind. This guilt is killing me now.

“Why do I say all this, Ma? The great Chozha Empire was founded by
Vijayaalaya Chozhan. The Kings who came after him shed their blood and gave
their lives to make the Empire strong and powerful. And for the welfare of such
a great Empire I have sacrificed my personal preferences and personal gains. I
want you to know that, Ma.

“For some reason or the other Pazhuvettaraiyars and the Chieftains who are their
friends did not like Adithya Karikalan. They wanted your son Madhuranthakan
to succeed me. They worked for that. I don’t see anything amiss in their
intentions. The son of the great Emperor Kandaraathithar, the son of an ardent
devotee of Lord Shiva has all the qualities for ruling this great Empire.

“In fact I should not have become the King myself. At that time the elders in the
family forced the crown on my head. I didn’t have the heart to go against their
wishes. I am reaping the consequences of that unfair act now. I have lost my son
and am still alive. Ma, I have suffered enough for one life. I don’t want to see
this large Empire divided and destroyed by a bloody civil war. Queen Mother,
you should help me prevent that. You should save this great Empire from the
impending disaster.”

Queen Mother wiped the tears from her eyes.

“Oh King of Kings, whatever you say do not appeal to my little brain. After my
husband’s death, my brother-in-law and your father Arinchaya Chozhan
ascended the throne. That was my husband’s wish. He also wished that you
should succeed your father. Your grandfather, Emperor Paranthaka, also wished
that you should become the King. So there is nothing unfair or out of order in
your becoming the King.

“My husband was devoted to Lord Shiva. He could not focus on the affairs of
the country. So during his time the Chozha Empire shrank in size. After you
came to power the Empire grew in size and strength. The enemies of the Empire
in the North and South were destroyed. The Chozha Empire attained its former
glory.

“One person who played a major role in this was your dear son Adithya
Karikalan. He was officially proclaimed as the Crown Prince. How can I now
agree to make my son the King? Even if I agree the world will not. You said that
you wanted to avoid a civil war. If my son had been crowned sidelining Adithya
Karikalan there would have surely been a civil war. That war would have
destroyed the empire.”

“You are right, Queen Mother. That was the reason I hesitated. I wanted to
convince everybody and arrive at a consensus. Before my efforts could bear fruit
Destiny showed its ugly face. Karikalan is dead. Ma, tell me what should I do
now. I can’t bear the burden of this Royal office any longer. I want to shift the
burden to somebody else.

“I want to honour the last wishes of my son. I want to spend my last days in the
golden palace my son lovingly built for me. Tell me who should be crowned.
Madhuranthakan is elder to Arulmozhi. Madhuranthakan, though young, is
actually Arulmozhi’s uncle. Kodumbalur Chieftain and Thirukkovalur
Malaiyaman want Arulmozhi to be crowned. That is against the principles of
fairness and justice. How can I agree to their proposal? I am at your feet, Ma.
You will have to help me. Please give your permission to crown
Madhuranthakan. With your permission I can convince Kodumbalur Chieftain
and Malaiyaman. Give your permission and your blessings. You will have the
honour of saving this great Empire from near destruction.”

“You don’t have to ask my permission, Emperor. I can’t go against the word of
God, who for a while lived here on this earth as my husband. I have decided not
to interfere in politics. Call Madhuranthakan and ask his views. Then do
whatever you consider as the best for this country.”

“Yes, you are right. Let us ask Madhuranthakan’s views. Only then we can
proceed further in this matter. But you will have to help me in that as well.
Where is Madhuranthakan, Ma?”

Sembianmadevi spoke in a choked voice.

“I have asking the same question for the past three days. Nobody is answering
me. Where is my son? Summon the Commander of Fort, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar
and ask him to fetch my son.”

“Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar wants to ask the same question to you, Ma. He says
that you and the Chief Minister have joined hands to make him disappear. Let
me summon Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and the Chief Minister on this issue. Please
allow me to do so.”

“Please go ahead.”

Kunthavai went outside and sent word through the guards.

Afew minutes later Chief Minister and Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar came there.

“Commander, this blessed lady, Queen Mother, whom the entire Empire
worships asks the same question which you asked. ‘Where is
Madhuranthakan?’”

“Your Majesty, the whole world knows the devotion and the character of our
Queen Mother. That is why the entire Empire worships her as a living Goddess. I
too adore her, Your Majesty. Please don’t think that I am finding fault with
anybody. For some strange reason Queen Mother does not want her son to
ascend the Chozha throne. Everybody knows this as well. No one can love a man
more than his mother. Our love for Madhuranthakan comes only after Queen
Mother’s love for him.

“Time has now come to explain some mysteries. Especially because the Emperor
has ordered to bring Madhuranthakan forthwith I have a duty to share my doubts
with you all. Three days ago Queen Mother and Madhuranthakan went out of the
Fort. They went to the hut of Chendan Amudhan, who has been serving the
temple by offering flowers, to enquire about his health. Then Queen Mother
alone came back into the Fort.

A little later I and my brother were talking to the Kodumbalur Chieftain. I was
asking about Prince Madhuranthakan. At that time an elephant, a palanquin and
a group of men entered the Fort. The men were shouting slogans “ Hail Prince
Madhuranthakan!” Chief Minister pointed out the group to me as an answer to
my question on Madhuranthakan. I was suspicious. Then as per Your Majesty’s
orders the command of the Fort was entrusted to me. Prince Madhuranthakan
normally stays in my Palace. I did not ask about him on that night. But on the
next day I came to know that he had not come to my palace. We searched
throughout the Fort. We enquired everybody. But we could not find
Madhuranthakan. I saw him entering the Fort. How did he vanish without a
trace? Sembianmadevi and the Chief Minister should forgive me for what I am
going to say. They have conspired to get rid of Madhuranthakan. They should
have told him something frightening which made him flee from this city, from
the country. Let me seek the pardon of the Queen Mother once again.”

Sembianmadevi spoke in a choked voice.

“Commander whatever you said is baseless. I promise on the lotus feet of my
Lord Shiva that I did not say anything about my son to the Chief Minister. We
did not conspire. There is no foul play here. On that evening Madhuranthakan
and I went to Chendan Amudhan’s hut. When I left the place Madhuranthakan
said that he would come a little later. I have not seen him since then. I have been
searching for him for the last three days.”

“ I accept the words of Queen Mother. I request Chief Minister to unravel the

mystery.”

“ What mystery?” – The Chief Minister asked.

“ The mystery of the missing son.”

“Commander, you said that you searched for him everywhere inside the Fort. Is
it true?”

“Yes. I looked everywhere except your palace.”

“Why did you leave my palace out?”

“Because you are the Chief Minister. I omitted your palace out of reverence for
your high post.”

“Then you have not done your duty, Commander. Let’s discuss it later. Your
Majesty, the Queen Mother did not tell anything about her son. I was not
involved in any conspiracy with her. But let me tell you something. The person
born of this divine lady’s blessed womb has been in my palace for the last three
days. He is now waiting outside the room to pay his respects to his mother and to
Your Majesty. If you permit me I will bring him in.”

Everyone in the room gasped. The Emperor was the first to speak.

“Minister, what is this game? Why should you seek my permission to bring in
the son of Queen Mother? Come on. Bring him in.”

Chief Minister went to the door and clapped his hands. Then he came back into
the room. The next second Chendan Amudhan entered the room followed by
Azhwarkkadian Nambi.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was furious.

“Looks like there are no limits to Chief Minister’s games.”

But when Queen Mother extended her hands and welcomed Amudhan with the
words, “My son, my dearest!” the Commander was confused.

Amudhan was not perturbed.

“Ma, at least now you have the heart to call me your son. It’s all because of the
fruits of my penance.”

With tears streaming from his eyes he approached Sembianmadevi.

The divine woman out of whose womb was born Madhuranthaka Uthama
Chozhan, celebrated as one of the greatest kings of Chozha Dynasty by history,

hugged her son and shed tears of joy.

Chapter 72: A Race To Sacrifice!

The stone edicts of the Chozha Period describe the lady born in the
Mazhavaraiyar clan and married to Emperor Kandaraathithar, Queen Mother
Sembianmadevi, as the ‘Lady who bore Uthama Chozhan Madhuranthakan in
her blessed womb.’ Every mother bears her child in her womb. So what was so
special about the Queen Mother bearing Madhuranthakan in her ‘blessed
womb?’ Some mothers bring up children born of other women as their own.
Sembianmadevi brought up somebody’s child as her own while her own son
grew up in a different place in difficult circumstances. Somebody who made the
edicts knew this truth. Hence we have that strange description of Queen Mother.

When Uthama Chozhan was five years old, Sembianmadevi saw him and his
foster mother for the first time after several years. Queen Mother anxiously
enquired about the well-being of Vani. She thought that the five year old boy
was Vani’s own child. She naturally developed a soft corner for the child. When
she casually enquired about the child there were unmistakable signs of shock and
fear in Vani’s face. Queen Mother thought that there should be other reasons for
Vani’s expression. Vani could not speak. Queen Mother could not know anything
from her. But Queen Mother gratefully remembered how Vani helped her at the
time of her delivery. Queen Mother loved the soft-looking child. She bestowed
endowments on them to make sure that the mother and son could lead a care-free
life. The endowment was to enable them serve the Thalikulathar temple by
offering flowers.

Chendan Amudhan grew up as a good young man. He was good in studies and
strong in character. He was devoted to Lord Shiva. He loved delivering flowers
for the temple. Sembianmadevi was moved. She loved Amudhan more. One day
it struck her like a lightning. There was a strong doubt in her mind. At once she
experienced happiness, pain and a vague fear. She tried to clear her doubts; but
she could not. She was now constantly thinking of her child which died a few
days after he was born. Sembianmadevi became restless.

Finally she decided to confront Vani. She had Vani brought to her Palace. She
had told Vani to bury the child which died a few days after his birth. She now
asked Vani to identify the place where the child was buried so that she could
build a memorial there. Even a mere narration of the past events gave her
tremendous pain. And Queen Mother had to communicate to a dumb woman in
sign language. That added to her misery.

Vani hesitated. But she could not stand the interrogation of the Queen Mother.
She finally blurted out the truth. She told Sembianmadevi that the child was not
really dead. When she was about to bury the child alive a man called
Karuthiruman stopped her. She was afraid to come back to Queen Mother. She
went to a place called Thirumaraikkadu with Karuthiruman. After some time
Karuthiruman left her. Vani came to Pazhaiyaarai with the child.

When Sembianmadevi learnt that Chendan Amudhan was her son her happiness
knew no bounds. She became ecstatic. Tears were streaming from her eyes. She
wanted to proclaim Amudhan as her son and hug him in public. But she
controlled herself. She was afraid of the complications that may arise if truth is
made known.

Sembianmadevi’s heart had been seasoned by devotion. She was convinced that
any child born in this world is God’s child. Her seasoned heart gave her the
strength to control her motherly love.

“What if my child grows in a hut? What is the difference between a life in a
palace and a life in a hut? All the pleasures of this uncertain human life are
nothing but an illusion. My dear husband hated the Royal pleasures and led a
saintly life focussing his mind steadily on the lotus feet of Lord Shiva. That is
the reason his son is blessed to live in a hut and serve the Lord.”

However Sembianmadevi was clear on one thing; she knew that Chendan
Amudhan was her son and not the man growing up as Madhuranthakan in her
palace. She was firm that Madhuranthakan should not succeed Sundara Chozhan
at any cost. She knew all the complications sprang from her switching the
child. Her conscience was clear as she had confessed everything to her husband
and had got his pardon.

“Whether it is your child or the child of an orphan, in the eyes of the Lord
everybody is the same. So bring up Madhuranthakan as your own son. But make
sure that he does not become the King. Even if others want him to be crowned
don’t let them do so. That would be the worst betrayal to the Chozha clan in
which I was born. And in the worst scenario don’t hesitate to proclaim the
truth.”

Emperor Kandaraathithar had told this to Sembianmadevi and had got her
promise as well. Sembianmadevi was ready to give her life to fulfil the promise
she had given to her late husband.

Poor soul, Emperor Kandaraathithar! He died without knowing that his own son
was growing up in Vani’s hut outside the Fort. What could he have done if he
knew? Sembianmadevi had been seeking an answer to that question.

Finally Sembianmadevi took a hard decision.

“It’s God’s will that a dumb woman’s son should grow up in the Palace while an
Emperor’s son should languish in a hut. Let me not interfere with God’s will. Any
interference will only lead to complications. My foster son will be badly hurt. I
should never commit that heinous sin.”

Sembianmadevi had unshaken faith in God’s grace. That gave her the strength to
stick to her decision all these years. But she could not help thinking about
Chendan Amudhan quite often. When she thought of him her mother’s heart
would overflow with unexpressed love. This struggle had been going on in the
depths of her heart for several years.

Water, which had been dammed for years would, one day or other, escape the
confines of the dam with great force. Mother’s love which had been dammed in
Queen Mother’s heart now went out with great force.

The words of the Chief Minister describing Amudhan as the one born of the
womb of ‘this divine lady’ served as a trigger for the dam to break and for love
to flow. Sembianmadevi relived the experience of bearing him in her womb for
ten months in one minute. She forgot herself, forgot her decision, forgot her selfimposed vows, and called Amudhan “My son! My dearest!” and hugged him
shedding copious tears.

Sembianmadevi was a bundle of emotions. She forgot herself. Amudhan’s words
hit her like a gale.

“Ma, at least now you have the heart to call me your son”

The import of these words was clear. It only meant one thing: Amudhan already
knew that she was his mother. But why did he remain quiet? Why didn’t he tell
the world that he was the son of the Empress?

It took some time for Sembianmadevi to steady herself. She then hardened her
heart and asked him.

“Son, do you know that I was the ill-fated woman who bore you in my womb?
Were you angry with me? And that was the reason you never asked me about
your birth?”

Words charged with emotions flowed out of Amudhan’s mouth.

“Ma, I knew I was your son for some time. My only prayer, no penance is a
better word, was that one day you should recognise me as your son and call me
so. Meanwhile I was struggling hard to be worthy of you, Ma. I was thinking of
the lotus feet of the Lord day and night. Even if you had not called me today I
thought of coming to you.

“I was waiting for the issue of succession to be resolved. I don’t want the throne
or the crown, Ma. I want something even more precious. The greatest privilege
of calling you, Ma. Yes, Ma, that is my birthright. Isn’t it? But I wanted to claim
my right only after the issue relating to succession is resolved one way or the
other. In order to honour your wishes I was even ready to sacrifice Poonkuzhali.
But thank God she changed her mind at the last moment. Three days ago there
was an attempt on my life. You remember blessing me and Poonkuzhali in our
hut? Soon after you went away there was an attempt on my life. I should have
died. But a dear friend saved my life.

“I was not that happy. I did not even thank him adequately. Only now I realise
how deeply I am indebted to him. You called me as “My son! My Dearest!” And
I lived to hear those sweet words from you, Ma. That is enough, Ma. More than
enough. I am the luckiest person in the whole world. I don’t want anything else
from you, Ma. Let this be not known to anybody other than those who are here

now. Let it not lead to further complications. Poonkuzhali and I are moving over
to Kodikkarai to start our life there. Please bless us, Ma. “

There are no words in any human language to describe the effect these words
had on Sembianmadevi.

In a choked voice punctuated by sobs the Queen Mother roared: “My son, my
child! You are the best of men. You are divine. You are my husband’s
descendant. You share my husband’s greatness.”

Emperor Sundara Chozhan, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and Princess Kunthavai
were yet to come out of the shock of this sudden revelation. The revelation and
its consequences caused a stir in their minds.

Kunthavai was the first to regain her powers of speech.

“Father, now I know why Queen Mother did not want Madhuranthakan to be
crowned,”’

Then the Emperor came out of the shock.

“You are right, dear. But the reason is gone now. Now she cannot object to her
own son, born of her womb, being crowned as the next Chozha Emperor.”

Sembianmadevi was disturbed.

“Emperor didn’t you hear what my son said? Let this secret not known to
anybody else. My son is not staking a claim for the throne. He has made it clear
to you, hasn’t he?”

“Yes, Your Majesty. There are enough problems in the Empire now. Let me not
add my share to it. Please let me go, Your Majesty. And please do bless me and
Poonkuzhali who is going to marry me. Poonkuzhali, come here.”

Poonkuzhali who was near the door till then came in. Chendan Amudhan and
Poonkuzhali first prostrated at the feet of Sembianmadevi. Then they touched the
feet of the Emperor.

“My Lord, please let us go to Kodikkarai. At once. Please, Ma. You too.”

Sembianmadevi spoke for her son.

“Let them go, Emperor. Whenever I feel like I’ll go to Kodikkarai to see them.”

Emperor was adamant.

“Impossible. I will never let them go.”

Chief Minister intervened.

“Your Majesty, let us not decide anything in a hurry now. Let them stay in my
palace for a few more days. Queen Mother has got her son. But we have not
heard anything about Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s son-in-law. Till he comes back
let them stay with me. Let this not be known to anybody else.”

“We need to tell this to Arulmozhivarman.”- Kunthavai.

“No. Let’s not tell him.“ Amudhan pleaded with the Princess.

Finally Emperor spoke.

“Devi, you have found your son after several years. I won’t let him go away
from you so soon. You live with him for a few days. You can stay in my palace
or in the Chief Minister’s Palace. Once the issue of succession is decided we can
think of sending them to Kodikkarai. Till then let nobody else know about this
development.”

Chapter 73: Vanathi’s Tricks!

Prince Arulmozhivarman was shattered. The issue of succession was becoming
nasty with every passing day. The whole Empire was boiling. There were
conflicts everywhere. He went around the country talking to the people
attempting to convince them that he did not want to be crowned. Wherever he
went slogans like “Ponniyin Selvan Is our King” and “Arulmozhivarman should
be crowned” were raised.

At times he would hear slogans in favour of the other camp. “Hail The Ancient
Tribe of Pazhuvettaraiyars” “Tyrant Kodumbalur Chieftain Down Down!”.
Prince Arulmozhivarman thought that he should start his campaign in those
places. But when the people saw him they shouted “Hail Ponniyin Selvan”.

Pazhuvettaraiyars’ soldiers had been posted around the Fort for security. They
would normally shout slogans for their bosses. But when they saw Ponniyin
Selvan coming near them they would shout “Hail Ponniyin Selvan!” “Let The
Deserving Head of Arulmozhivarman Wear The Crown.” “Long Live The Great
Warrior Ponniyin Selvan who Conquered Lanka.”

Ponniyin Selvan went on a campaign to convince people that the crown should
go to Madhuranthakan. His campaign had the opposite effect. Even those in the
opposite camp wanted Ponniyin Selvan to be the King. He was embarrassed. He
was also worried that Madhuranthakan could not be seen these days. He heard
that Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had blamed Kodumbalur Chieftain on this issue.
The charge could not be dismissed as baseless. Even Arulmozhivarman had his
doubts about Kodumbalur Chieftain’s role in the sudden disappearance of
Madhuranthakan. Kodumbalur Chieftain and Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman were
determined to crown Prince Arulmozhivarman. It appeared to him that the Chief
Minister was also on their side. Were these people keeping Madhuranthakan

their hostage till the succession issue was resolved? Or had they killed him?

Kodumbalur Chieftain and Malaiyaman thought that Pazhuvettaraiyars and
Sambuvaraiyars were responsible for the death of Adithya Karikalan. This was
known to all. So the other camp thought that the Kodumbalur Chieftain and
Malaiyaman killed Madhuranthakan to avenge Karikalan’s death. These people,
in spite of their age and experience, were quite rash in their decisions. And if
only they had done something like that the blame would fall squarely on
Arulmozhivarman, because for the untrained eye, he had the most powerful
motive to kill his rival for the throne, Madhuranthakan.

Today people of the Chozha Empire greet me wherever I go. They shout slogans
for me. They insist out of love and affection that I should be their king. But will
their minds remain the same? People are generally fickle-minded. They will soon
change sides. The same people who praise me now will blame me tomorrow.
They will even say that I killed my own uncle to become the King. They might
accuse me of killing my own brother Adithya Karikalan at the Kadambur Palace.
Did that angel Mandhakini Devi save me from River Cauvery only for my being
branded as a greedy killer? She sacrificed her life to save my father. She has
thus become a Goddess now. I pray to her to save me from disgrace. She should
save me from the greatest humiliation a man can have in his life – that he killed
his brother and uncle to get to power.

Prince Arulmozhivarman had read the history of Lankan Empire. There it was
quite common for members of the same family kill one another to come to
power.

If I am classed with those greedy elements .. Oh My God.. I’d rather die than
hear these baseless charges be levelled against me. The disgrace would continue
long after I die. I badly want to pour out my mind to somebody and seek their
advice. But I don’t find any one who will listen to me. I am sure that those who
are around me are working against me. Some of them hate me. But others love

me. Thinking they are helping me they are dragging me into the pit of
humiliation and disgrace. Oh My God, Who is there to help me in this hour of
need?

Prince Arulmozhivarman had lost hopes even with his dear sister, Princess
Kunthavai. It appeared that she was involved in some secret mission. Even his
beloved Vanathi was trying to hide something from him. She was going
somewhere and invariably came with a mysterious look on her face.

‘I can even bear my sister working against my wishes; but I can’t bear Vanathi
working against me’

He therefore wanted to confront Vanathi and ask her point blank what the hell
was going on.

Once he saw Vanathi going somewhere after making sure nobody was seeing
her. Prince Arulmozhivarman followed her without her knowledge. Vanathi
walked through the upper corridors of the Palace and then climbed down to walk
through a secret passage between high walls. Prince Arulmozhivarman was sure
that she was going to the place where Prince Madhuranthakan was kept. His
curiosity was piqued. He was furious at the same time. He followed her.

Finally Vanathi reached another large palace and walked into a room and tried to
close the door. Prince Arulmozhivarman blocked her. He placed his foot inside
the room making it impossible for her to close the door.

Ponniyin Selvan grabbed Vanathi’s hand and almost shouted at her: “Vanathi,
your tricks will not work with me. Tell me who is hidden in this palace?”

Vanathi smiled.

“In fact my tricks have worked with you. I know you would not have come here
even if I had invited you. Please come in and find out who is hidden here.”

Arulmozhivarman expected to see Madhuranthakan there. But when he saw his
friend Vandhiya Thevan he was both happy and surprised.

Vandhiya Thevan sat up on his bed.

“Welcome, Prince. I have been expecting you for the past two days. Please
release me from the prison of these women.”

Ponniyin Selvan sat by the side of his friend.

“What is this friend? How did you come here? Didn’t you escape from the
underground jail? Then how were you caught in the prison of these women? I
thought you will be in Lanka by now. I had even planned to join you there after
the succession issue is resolved.”

“Yes, Prince. I should have been in Lanka by now. I should have been looking
for the ancestral crown of Pandyas and their opal necklace. I tried to save
Chendan Amudhan from the spear of Doctor’s son, Pinaakapani. The spear fell
on me. I became unconscious. I don’t know how I came to be jailed by these
women. Please help me escape from this prison, Prince. Or else, they will accuse

me of killing my employer and your dear brother, Adithya Karikalan.”

Vanathi spoke:

“What he says is wrong. If he escapes then the blame will fall on him. Your
sister thinks that he should be here till the truth comes out. Of course nobody
should know that he is here.”

“I think she speaks sense. If you try to run away then people can easily blame
you. The blame will come to me as well. People may even say that I hired you to
kill my own brother. So it is better that we should prove to the world what really
happened. First tell me what happened on that day in Kadambur.”

Vandhiya Thevan started a long narration. Prince Arulmozhi listened with rapt
attention. But at the end of it he could not come to any conclusion as to what
caused the death of Adithya Karikalan.

Chapter 74: “I Will Be The King”

Vandhiya Thevan concluded his narration with these words: “Prince, there is
only one person in this whole world who can save me. He is Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. I was hiding in the place where musical instruments are stored
at the Kadambur Palace. Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar wrung my neck and made me
fall unconscious. I did not see his face, but I guess it can only be him. Nobody
else could have come there at that time. The old man doubted Nandini’s fidelity
and should have come there in the guise of a Kalamuka. Idumban Kari who also
belongs to the Kalamuka group should have led Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar through
the secret passage.

But the problem is, Prince, the greatest warrior of the Empire, Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar started hating me from the time we first met. His hatred for me
has been growing every day. So I don’t think that he will come forward to tell
the truth and save me. He will be only too happy to see me die with the
horrendous stigma that I killed my own employer, Adithya Karikalan.

Hence, Prince, I beg of you, please let me go away. I will go to Lanka and find
out the Pandya crown and necklace and bring them for you.

Or else, Prince, please kill me. Please don’t let them impale me in public,
branding me as the traitor who killed your brother. Death at your hands is a
much better option than public shame. Or ask this Kodumbalur Princess to give
me some poison. This blessed lady and your dear sister took mercy on this
orphan and have almost rescued me from the jaws of death. But I am not going
to thank them. “

Vanathi spoke:

“Listen Prince. This warrior does not want to die while fighting the enemy at the
war-front. Instead he is praying to be killed by poison taken from the hands of a
woman.”

“Prince, this lady and your sister, will surely kill me by their harsh words.
Compared to that dying by poison will any day be a better option.”

Prince Arulmozhivarman appeared distracted. His mind was elsewhere. He had a
flash. He jumped from his seat.

“I have decided. I am going to be crowned the Emperor of Chozha Kingdom.
People all over the country are raising slogans, “We want Arulmozhivarman as
our King.” That is the wish of our army as well. I will honour their wishes. I will
become the King. Do you know why, my friend? Only to declare you innocent
and let you go free. Even if that earns me a bad name I don’t care. Many of our
Chieftains oppose me. They might try to spread rumours that I had a hand in the
death of my brother. Let them do it. I don’t care. I can answer their charges. I can
tell them that they invited my brother to the Kadambur Palace and killed him
there. And as an Emperor I can punish them for sedition and murder. Whatever
may happen, I have decided that I will be the King. I will go against the wishes
of my father and my sister. But I can’t bear to see you suffer. I will never let you
down, my friend. This is a promise.”

Vanathi jumped in joy.

“Prince it is a pity that your sister is not here to hear your proclamation. Will

you please say this again in her presence?””

“Why not? Not once, but a hundred times. I won’t just talk. I will also act upon
my words.”

Vandhiya Thevan muffled his sobs, wiped his tears and spoke in a choked voice.

“Prince, if you change your mind and become the King, for the sake of this poor
orphan, it is the good fortune of this great country. To the extent I know Prince
Madhuranthakan he is not fit to rule the country. He travels in closed palanquins
like women. And is forever involved in one conspiracy or the other to get the
throne. Is he fit to rule an Empire like this? Not at all. Chozha throne is no
ordinary throne. It was adorned by giants like Vijayaalaya Chozhan and Emperor
Paranthaka. How can a coward like Madhuranthakan sit on that great throne?
There is no wonder people hate him and do not want him to be the King.”

“Perhaps Madhuranthakan also knew that. That’s why he fled the scene.”

“Yes. I am going to abandon all efforts to find him. I am going to be the King.”

Princess Kunthavai heard these words as she was stepping into the room.

“I am sorry, Thambi. You may have to give up your claim. Neither the throne nor
the crown is yours. Have you forgotten that my dear friend has taken a vow not
to ascend the throne? I can’t bear to see some other girl sitting by your side on
the throne at the time of your coronation.”

“ Akka, why don’t you close your eyes precisely at that moment? I can help you
in that. I will close your eyes with my hands, Akka.” – Vanathi.

Ponniyin Selvan spoke to Kunthavai only half in jest.

“Sister, simply because your friend has taken a vow do you mean to say that the
Chozha Empire should remain headless? Our father does not want to continue
any longer. He wants to go to Kanchi at the earliest opportunity.
Madhuranthakan has disappeared. What else can we do? The existing problems
cannot be solved unless I become the King. You know very well that the whole
Empire is agitated on the issue of succession. How long can the country remain
in that state?”

“I bring happy tidings, Thambi. That was why I came running to see you.
Madhuranthakan has finally come out of his hiding. The penance of our
ancestors has not gone waste. You need not have to worry about the Chozha
Empire any longer. Even if Madhuranthakan refuses the crown you will have to
force it on his head.” – Kunthavai.

Kunthavai’s enthusiasm surprised others. During the last few days Kunthavai
wanted Madhuranthakan to be crowned. But she had never been this enthusiastic
on the issue of succession and that too preferring somebody else to her own
brother.

Ponniyin Selvan hid his feelings and spoke in a nonchalant voice.

“Sister, where was he all the time? Why? How and when did he come out?”

“He has been with us all the time. Only we could not recognise hm. Thambi, he
is born out of Sembianmadevi’s womb. That makes him more qualified for the
Emperor’s post than you. The throne belongs to your uncle. So abandon all your
dreams of becoming a King. A miracle happened in his life. Four days ago there
was an attempt on our uncle’s life. A killer aimed a short appear on him and was
about to throw. If only he had thrown the spear Madhuranthakan would have
died. Another untimely death would have happened in the Chozha clan. Do you
know which warrior saved us from that calamity? Do you know who risked his
life to save our uncle’s life?”

Princess Kunthavai’s large eyes fell on Vandhiya Thevan. Vandhiya Thevan
could not bear the love, the support and the compassion in the large, beautiful
eyes of the Princess. Her eyes hugged him and held him in their hug for some
time. He was overwhelmed.

Prince Arulmozhivarman was surprised.

“That’s news to me, Akka. My friend never breathed a word about it.”

“He might not have told you. Because he doesn’t know his own greatness. He
does not know how deeply the Chozha clan is indebted to him.”

“Akka, why are you talking in puzzles? I don’t get you, Akka. It will be better if
you stop giving us shock after shock and tell the whole truth in one go. How did
this man save Madhuranthakan? Where? From what danger? Where is
Madhuranthakan now?”

“Ponniyin Selva! He will be here in a few seconds. Knowing you were here I
sent word for him. You can hear the story directly from the horse’s mouth. Or
you may know from Poonkuzhali who was an eye-witness at the scene. They
have come. I hear footsteps.”

Four persons entered the room. Chief Minister, Azhwarkkadian, Chendan
Amudhan and Poonkuzhali. Chendan Amudhan was dressed differently. Silk
dresses adorned his body. A princely crown adorned his head. He wore jewels
usually worn by the Princes.

Those who were in the room were surprised by the visitors. Prince
Arulmozhivarman asked Kunthavai: “Didn’t you say that Madhuranthakan was
about to come? I don’t see him here.”

“Thambi, see this man, the one who wears the crown of a Prince. He is the one
born to Sembianmadevi and Emperor Kandaraathithar. He is our uncle, our
father’s first cousin. He is an ardent devotee of Lord Shiva. Till now he was
hiding in the name of Chendan Amudhan. Thanks to the good fortune of the
Chozha clan he revealed himself today. Four days ago a crook tried to kill him
with a short spear. This warrior of the Vaana Clan, your friend Vandhiya Thevan,
saved his life and thus did a great service to the Chozha clan. Our Chief
Minister’s disciple, Azhwarkkadian, did not mind the fact that our uncle was a
Saivite and brought him into the Fort assuming great risks on the way.”

Azhwarkkadian intervened.

“Devi, I never helped this Saivite, nor will I ever in future. I wanted to bring
Vandhiya Thevan in the palanquin. Hence I brought this Saivite in disguised as a

Prince.”

Kunthavai continued in the same strain.

“Yes, Azhwarkkadian has helped us in two ways. He brought in the real
Madhuranthakan, adorning him with a crown and silk dresses. I don’t know
whether he knew that he was brining in the next emperor of Chozha Kingdom.
Thambi, the person whom we thought as Madhuranthakan till now is not the real
Madhuranthakan. This man, formerly known as Chendan Amudhan, was born
out of the womb of Queen Mother Sembianmadevi. It was an intricate game
played by God that made him live in a hut till now. But as he was born of the
ancient Chozha clan we had been surprised to see some Royal qualities in him.
Once he helped this warrior of the Vaana clan to escape from the Fort. At
another time he and Poonkuzhali brought you safely to Nagapattinam. Can we
ever forget that, brother? We learnt that he is our father’s cousin directly from
the Queen Mother. He also accepted it. Thambi, on this great and auspicious day
I am pleased to welcome this man to our Palace. No, that is not the right
expression. I am welcoming him to his own palace. He has been living away
from us all these years. I now invite him to live with us and our family. If we do
things right we should have a grand celebration to commemorate this re-union.
But this is not the time for any celebration. In fact we should not let this news
leak out of the Palace.

“Chithappa please come here. I don’t know how I can express my happiness on
your coming back into our family. When my dear brothers go out of town or
come back I used to apply holy ash on them. You have come to us. Let me do the
same to you. Please accept it, Chithappa.”

Princess Kunthavai applied the holy ash and kumkum on Chendan Amudhan’s
forehead.

Chief Minister raised a slogan.

“Hail Chozha Prince Madhuranthakan!”

Azhwarkkadian echoed him.

When Kunthavai started to talk at first Arulmozhivarman was surprised. There
was even a doubt in his mind. He thought that his sister was teasing him. Or she
should have some other plan in her mind. But his doubts evaporated as
Kunthavai finished her emotional narration and applied the holy ash on
Amudhan’s forehead. Kunthavai’s heart was overflowing with love; so was
Arulmozhivarman’s.

Prince Arulmozhivarman went near Chendan Amudhan.

“Chithappa I loved you earlier, even without knowing your true identity. How I
wished I had a brother like you. Now I know. It was all because of the close
relationship we share. After all blood is always thicker than water.”

Ponniyin Selvan hugged his uncle and shed tears.

Vandhiya Thevan’s speech was even more emotional.

“Aha! I had my doubts. I knew that the glory of an ancient Royal clan was
hiding somewhere inside the heart of this humble devotee of the Lord. Otherwise

he would not have given refuge to me, a man without rank or fortune. He would
not have helped me escape from this town. Oh son of the Emperor
Kandaraathithar, please help me escape from this town once again. Let me go
away. I am really sad that I will be missing your grand coronation ceremony. But
that cannot be helped. In a way I am very happy. I am not happy just because
Chendan Amudhan is going to be crowed. But I am happy because Poonkuzhali..
.. I am sorry, Her Majesty Poonkuzhali Devi is going to be the next Chozha
Empress. Even she might not have expected that her dream will be fulfilled so
soon.”

Kunthavai spoke to Vandhiya Thevan.

“This kind of exertion is not good for you. At least for some more time. You
will be completely cured only if you rest. And if you decide to run away from
here, you can run faster.”

She then spoke to her brother.

“Thambi, our dear Queen Mother had been objecting to Madhuranthakan’s
succession only for this reason. Even we were not that happy with the other
Madhuranthakan being crowned. He did not have any of the qualities found in
the valiant Chozha clan. Our grandmother tried her best; and yet she could not
plant the seed of devotion in his heart. There was no trace of valour or courage
in him. Even then we tried hard and made up our minds to let him succeed our
father. But in crowning this new Madhuranthakan we are extremely happy. I
can’t wait to see Poonkuzhali, who once saved you and the Prince of Vallam
from the sea, as an Empress adorning the ancient Chozha throne. Let our Chief
Minister do the arrangements.”

The Chief Minister responded.

“Devi, Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar should come forward to tell us what happened at
the Kadambur Palace. We should know what happened to the old
Madhuranthakan. Before that we cannot even think of coronation.”

“Let me ask Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Finding out what happened to the old
Madhuranthakan is your responsibility, Chief Minister.”

Chendan Amudhan spoke for the first time. He addressed Prince
Arulmozhivarman.

“Prince, you called me Chithappa, father’s brother. These people call me Prince.
But I can’t call you ‘my son’. I have been living in a hut for the past twenty two
years. I can’t suddenly think of myself as a prince born in a royal clan. Let me
share this with you. Once I helped Vandhiya Thevan to escape from this Fort. I
was thrown into the underground jail. I learnt about my birth from the prisoner
in the adjacent cell. He told me that the son of the dumb woman is growing up as
a Prince in the palace whereas the son of the Empress is growing in the dumb
mother’s hut. I knew the truth. I knew why Queen Mother, whom the whole
country worships, loves me so much. My only dream then was to hear the words
“My son” coming from the mouth of Queen Mother. That dream has come true
today. I don’t want anything else.”

Chief Minister interrupted him.

“Prince, it is not what you like or hate, it is about what is just and what is fair.
We need to think about it.”

“Please do think, Chief Minister. But I don’t have to think for even a second. I
have already thought a lot about it and have come to a clear decision.
Poonkuzhali had been telling me several times that she was going to marry a
Prince and ascend a throne. She even told me that she rejected me only for that
reason. At that time, at least to win over her love, I wanted to proclaim to her,
“Listen girl, I am a Prince and if I wish this Chozha Empire will be mine.” I
controlled myself. I prayed to my Lord that I should never have the desire or
greed to rule over a country. I was even ready to sacrifice Poonkuzhali for that.
But thank God, in the end Poonkuzhali has discarded the ambition not befitting
her station and has finally condescended to marry this poor devotee of Lord
Shiva.”

Poonkuzhali spoke.

“How can you say that the desire to be the Queen do not befit my station in life?
I deserve to be an Empress. Even then I have agreed to marry you and make
garlands for the Lord all my life.“

Kunthavai applauded Poonkuzhali.

“Hear, hear! That’s it Poonkuzhali. This is enough to tell that you deserve to be
an Empress. How does one deserve something?. Thirukkural says, “By birth all
beings are the same.” So don’t abandon your old desires. You join us,
Poonkuzhali, in advising this Emperor’s son.

“Chithappa, even after knowing about your birth your act of sacrificing your
right for the Crown shows your large heart. We all want you to be our King. The
Emperor wants you to succeed him. Chief Minister also wants you to be the
King. I and my brother Ponniyin Selvan want you to be the King. My dear friend
Vanathi wants you to be the King. She has also taken on herself the arduous task

of changing the mind of her uncle, Kodumbalur Chieftain. Why should you
refuse, Chithappa?”

“Devi, you want me to be the King. But what do the people say? Perhaps you
may not know, Princess. I have been moving with people all my life. I know
what is in the minds of the people here in Thanjavur, in Pazhaiyaarai,
Kudanthai, Kodikkarai, Nagapattinam, everywhere. I have also heard what
people in Pandya Kingdom, Kongu Kingdom, Pallava Kingdom and in Lanka
want. They want Prince Arulmozhivarman. That is the unanimous voice of the
people all over the Empire. How can I swim against the wishes of so many
people, Devi? How can I govern a country of this size, Devi? Oh My God! I
know people hate the man whom you call as the old Madhuranthakan. Do you
want me to be so hated by the people? No, Devi. Please don’t do it. Don’t harm
me in that cruel manner. I have never harmed you, right?”

Nobody knew how to respond to that outburst. Prince Arulmozhivarman stood
up and spoke in a majestic voice.

“Let’s stop the discussion at this point. When you entered the room I was telling
Vandhiya Thevan that I want to be crowned at any cost. I will surely do it. I have
now learnt what is in the heart of this noble prince born out of the womb of the
noble lady, Sembianmadevi. Let us not talk about this any more.”

Chapter 75: Disastrous Consequences

Place: The Cabinet Hall Of the Thanjavur Palace. Emperor Sundara Chozhan
was on the ceremonial throne. On his either side were seated the most important
women of the Royal household. Ministers, Generals and Princes were standing
reverentially before the Emperor. Among the women were seen Queen Mother
Sembianmadevi, the Empress Vanamadevi, Princess Kunthavai and Kodumbalur
Princess Vanathi. Poonkuzhali, though now equal in stature to the women of the
Palace, was shy to be seen in their midst and stood a little away. Among the men
in attendance were Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, Chief
Minister, General of the Southern Command Kodumbalur Chieftain,
Malaiyaman, Prince Arulmozhivarman, the new-found Madhuranthakan and
Parthibendra Pallavan. Behind the Chief Minister stood Azhwarkkadian
maintaining a respectable distance from his Master.

The Emperor glanced around.

“Have all the invitees come? I can’t see the Kadambur Chieftain.”

“Kandhanmaran came just now. Father and son will join us soon.”

“Oh, Kandhanmaran has come? What news has he brought? Has he brought
back those who escaped from jail?”

“No, Your Majesty. He claims to have killed Vandhiya Thevan. The other
escapee, the mad man, could not be caught. He has fled.” – Parthibendran.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar grunted. People thought he was going to speak. But he
did not.

The Emperor spoke again.

“Chief Minister, you know what’s in my heart. I have invited those who are dear
to our Chozha clan. You will have to tell them why I called them. I am sure you
can explain the situation better than me.”

“At your command, Your Majesty.”

Chief Minister now addressed the meeting.

“You all know that the Emperor is in agony due to various reasons. Our Emperor
lost his first-born, who in valour was no less than the legendary Abimanyu and
Aravan of Mahabharata. The death of Adithya Karikalan is still shrouded in
mystery. Our Emperor had not seen him during the last three years. Karikalan
built a golden palace at Kanchi and had been inviting his father, to stay there. He
has been sending message after message to the Emperor. But the Emperor did
not go. You know the reason. Our Emperor was here in Thanjavur under the
protection of the Commander of this Fort, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

“Several rumours were doing rounds in the country. If the Emperor had left
Thanjavur some might think that he did not trust the Pazhuvettaraiyars enough.
Our Emperor did not want to give room to such an opinion. I am going to tell
you something which our Emperor is reluctant to share with you. The Generals

and Chieftains assembled here should forgive me.

“Our Emperor was ill for some time. He had lost the use of his legs. That was an
illness of his body. The illness in his mind was far worse. You have been great
friends of this Chozha clan. You helped the Empire in times of need and
supported it like pillars made of diamond. And yet you started to fight with each
other. The in-fighting hurt the Emperor’s heart and aggravated his bodily illness.
Under the leadership of Rajadithyan you all fought together in the Thakkolam
Battlefield for the Empire. Rajadithyan died suddenly and the Chozha Army was
defeated. But because of your valour, of your determination to fight till the very
end, you turned that stinging defeat into a stunning victory. You got back the
Thondaimandalam and the Kanga Fiefdom and brought them under our direct
rule. At Lanka you made Mahindan run for his life and hoisted the Tiger Flag in
that island nation. How could you accomplish those great feats? Because you
were all together in one side and you all sincerely believed that your welfare was
in the welfare of this great Empire.

“But all that changed during the last few years. For some reason unknown to me
you started hating each other. You divided yourselves into two factions. Our
Emperor tried hard to remove the line that divided you. He found out that the
dividing line was centred on the issue of succession. None of you had the
courage to say that openly to the Emperor. But our Emperor, known for his
natural intelligence, found out the reason. He wanted to hold talks with you and
arrive at a compromise formula acceptable to all. He had planned to move to
Kanchi in deference to the wish of his son, but only after peacefully resolving
the issue of succession. He had decided to give the throne to the son of Emperor
Kandaraathithar. He believed that he can convince his son Adithya Karikalan on
this issue.

“He had been sending word to Adithya Karikalan inviting him to Thanjavur to
amicably settle the issue of succession. In the meanwhile tragedy struck.
Karikalan was killed. Honestly when the Emperor learnt that Karikalan is
coming to Thanjavur he was excited. He sincerely believed that the Prince’s visit

would reduce the friction amongst the Chieftains and pave way for a smooth
transition of power. Added to that if Karikalan married Sambuvaraiyar’s
daughter, our Emperor believed, that you, Chieftains, will be united once again
and that would provide a conducive atmosphere to resolve the issue of
succession. I too thought so. Many of you would have also thought so. That is
the reason why even our Thirukkovalur Malaiyaman did not object to
Karikalan’s visiting Kadambur. But our hopes were belied and our dreams died
when Prince Adithya Karikalan died an untimely, unnatural death at the
Kadambur Palace.”

“Aren’t we going to find out the truth behind the Prince’s death? It will be better
if you answer this question before proceeding further in your speech.” –
Malaiyaman.

“Yes. We can’t discuss succession or for that matter anything without knowing
the truth behind the Prince’s death.” – Kodumbalur Chieftain.

“Celebrated Warriors, whatever has happened has happened. Our Emperor feels
that there is no point in digging the past.” – Chief Minister.

“That won’t be fair, just or proper. The Chozhas’ system of justice is worldfamous. Even if a friendless orphan dies unnaturally it is enquired into. If it is
know that somebody was responsible for his death then the guilty is punished.
How can we just brush aside the murder of the Crown Prince Adithya Karikalan
without even a preliminary enquiry?” – Kodumbalur Chieftain.

The Emperor let out a long sigh.

“Please listen, Kodumbalur Mama. Can anybody else grieve more than I, for the
death of my dear son, my first born, Karikalan? I don’t want an enquiry. Do you
know why? I am convinced that nobody is responsible for the death of my son. I
lost my son as a punishment for my past sins. Tell me if there is any way I can
atone for my sins. I shall do it at any cost. Let us not seek any other external
reason for the death of my son.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar spoke now.

“Your Majesty, if you take a stand like this people will think that you are trying
to save somebody who is guilty. The people have already started building
theories about the death of our Prince. It is better to investigate the case and find
out the truth. Whosoever is found guilty should be punished.”

Parthibendran responded.

“Well said, Commander. That is the right thing to do. If we don't hold an enquiry
into such a grave crime then people would lose faith in the system of justice.”

Kandhanmaran spoke for the first time.

“Respected Elders, why should we debate and discuss so much on a non-issue?
If you think, I, a young man still green behind his ears, talk too much, please
forgive me. The guilty has been punished. I killed Vandhiya Thevan with my
own hand. I killed the person who killed the Crown Prince; I killed the man who
corrupted my sister’s mind and have made her insane. Why should we discuss
about investigation and enquiry?”

Kandhanmaran had entered the assembly silently when Chief Minister was
addressing it. People knew that he had come only after they heard him spoke.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar spoke in a whisper: “Idiot! How was this rank idiot born
as Sambuvaraiyar’s son?”

Chief Minister now questioned Kandhanmaran.

“Kandhanmara, is it true that you killed Vandhiya Thevan? Did you see him?
You went after him only in the night. How did you see him?”

“Chief Minister, I know that you will never believe me. Do you think I can’t
recognise him at night?”

“Vandhiya Thevan too is a warrior. Did he not fight back?”

“I know. You don’t believe in my valour. This is my prayer to the Emperor. Your
Majesty, two persons escaped from prison. One was a mad man who had been in
our prison for several years. When that mad man tried to block me the other man
was approaching the opposite bank of the river. I killed the other man. He should
be Vandhiya Thevan.”

“Have you brought his dead body?”

“Minister, if only I had known that you will suspect me I would have gone a
little further down the Vadavaaru River to retrieve the body. But then I could not
have come to this meeting on time.”

“Yes, if you had not come, then it would have been a great loss to all of us.”
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was sarcastic.

Kodumbalur Chieftain asked Kandhanmaran:

“Thambi, why are you so keen on capturing and punishing Vandhiya Thevan?”

“Should I have to tell the reason? Here you go. The tragedy happened in our
palace. And if the culprit is not caught won’t you suspect me and my father?”

The Emperor came for his defence.

“Kandhanmara, my son! Even if the whole world suspects you I won’t. I know
Sambuvaraiyar’s loyalty and devotion to me. Where is your father?”

“Your Majesty, it is my misfortune that I have to tell the tragic story of my
family in this august assembly. As I was telling my father that I had killed
Vandhiya Thevan, my sister Manimekalai, overheard me and she came to kill me
with a knife. My father is trying his best to pacify her. He will come soon. He
has communicated through me that he is ready to accept whatever decision is
taken by this assembly.”

Malaiyaman said: “Thambi, your sister had been telling like a mad woman, “I
killed the Prince.”

“Yes, she did. Only to shield Vandhiya Thevan, to put the blame on herself. At
that time she was only half-mad. But now she has completely lost her mind. Our
clan is afflicted with a grave misfortune.”

The Chief Minister’s voice was majestic,

“Kandhanmaran, are you sure that it was Vandhiya Thevan who killed Prince
Karikalan? How can you be so sure? Did you see him killing the Prince? Or did
you hear that from an eye-witness?””

“Honourable Minister, do you need a mirror to see a wound in your palm?
Vandhiya Thevan was the only person found in the place where the Prince was
killed. Just by seeing his face one can be sure that he was the culprit. The place
was the bed chamber of the Junior Queen of Pazhuvur. What was Vandhiya
Thevan doing there? If he is not guilty why should he escape from the prison?”

Parthibendran came in to defend his friend.

“Our Chief Minister has taken upon himself the responsibility of producing him.
I want to remind him of his responsibility.”

“Pallava Prince, it is true that I assumed the responsibility. I never expected that
this man, the son of Sambuvaraiyar, would take upon himself the role of a judge,

conducted the case and even punished the accused. Vandhiya Thevan hails from
an ancient warrior clan. His ancestors ruled over a large empire once upon a
time. The Chozha Kings have married the women from Vaana clan in the past.
And if somebody from the family of Chieftains is accused then it is but fair and
proper that the Emperor himself should sit on judgment in that case.”

Parthibendran retorted: “If somebody has run away from the prison he can be
brought alive or dead. That also is a convention.”

“But Kandhanmaran has done neither. He has neither brought him alive or dead.
He has not brought his body. He has left that in the Vadavaaru River.” – Chief
Minister.

Sambuvaraiyar entered the assembly hall. All the eyes were on him. They saw
the enormous grief on his wrinkled face.

Kandhanmaran went near his father and spoke in a whisper: “How is
Manimekalai?”

“No improvement. I have asked your mother to be with her.” Sambuvaraiyar was
unusually loud.

Emperor now addressed Sambuvaraiyar: “If you want to be with your daughter,
you may please go. We can have this discussion tomorrow.”

“No, Your Majesty. I can’t do anything by staying near my daughter. If that

warrior of the Vaana Clan, Vandhiya Thevan, who was killed by my son comes
back alive, then it may help my daughter.”

Sambuvaraiyar’s voice was laced with grief and bitterness. Silence prevailed for
a while in that assembly.

Chief Minister updated Sambuvaraiyar on the proceedings till then.

“We were discussing the tragedy that happened at your Palace. All of us realise
the pain you are going through because the Crown Prince died in your palace.
The Emperor does not want you to be blamed for the tragedy. But we are afraid
that this will lead to many rumours, in which you or members of your family
might be implicated. So the members of assembly think that it will be better to
know the circumstances surrounding the unnatural death of our Prince. Do you
have anything to say about that? Your son, Kandhanmaran, believes that
Vandhiya Thevan was solely responsible for the death of our Prince. What is
your take on that?”

Sambuvaraiyar appeared shocked. He looked around. As soon as his eyes fell on
his son he spoke very firmly.

“Yes, yes. The idiot of my son said the same thing even at that time. I didn’t
believe it then. Even now I don’t believe his version. I invited Prince Karikalan
only on my son’s suggestion. That led to all these disastrous consequences. That
has caused a blot on me and on my clan.”

Malaiyaman melted.

“Calm, Sambuvaraiyar, calm. What has happened has happened. You invited my
grandson with all good intentions to your palace. Nobody here wants to blame
you for Karikalan’s murder. We just want to know what happened. We will be
grateful if you can help us.”

“How can I help you? My son says something. My daughter’s version is entirely
different. I couldn’t believe either. I don’t know what happened. Looks like as if
I was blindfolded when the event happened. Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar can help.
Ask him. He was the root cause of everything. He was the one who brought
Madhuranthakan secretly to Kadambur. He sought my daughter’s hand for
Madhuranthakan. Our bad time started from then onwards. I now learn that
Prince Madhuranthakan has vanished. Then Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar came with
his wife, the Junior Queen, Nandini. Then he made the Crown Prince come from
Kancheepuram. He made them stay in my palace and went away. Ask him where
did he go? Ask him where his Junior Queen Nandini is now.”

Sambuvaraiyar was ranting for sometime.

The Emperor interrupted.

“Enough. Stop. It was precisely for this reason that I did not want an enquiry
into what has happened. You did not listen to me. You have already enough to
fight among yourselves. Should my son’s death add to your feuds?
Sambuvaraiyar, you are not responsible for what happened in your palace. That
was the reason I ordered your immediate release from he underground prison.
My first born, my darling son, Adithya Karikalan died only because of my past
sis. Nobody is to be blamed. Nobody needs to offer their suggestions or expert
opinions. Neither Sambuvaraiyar nor Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar needs to explain
how the tragedy happened. Am I clear?”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar cleared his throat. The sound resembled the roar of a
lion.

“Oh Great Chozha King, please have mercy on me. I have a duty to talk. I have a
duty to reveal what is there in my mind. I have a duty to tell the truth as I know.
Yes, Your Majesty. Once I thought I can fulfil my vows without telling the truth
and there was no need to tell the truth. My vow is that if the life of anybody born
in the Chozha Clan is in danger I will sever my head and die. I could not save
Adithya Karikalan. I have to now fulfil my vow. And before that I want to tell
the truth. Otherwise there will be unnecessary doubts and rumours; many
innocent people may be blamed.”

The silence in the Royal Court was deafening. Everybody assembled there felt
sorry for the old man.

The Emperor spoke in a choked voice:

“Mama! Please think it over! Why should you talk about the past? Simply
because you tell the truth the dead won’t come back alive. I am sure you would
not have willingly betrayed the Chozha clan. Hence I request you to forget the
past and focus on what is to be done in future.”

“No, Your Majesty. I have to tell you what happened. I will have to tell you that I
was about to commit the worst act of betrayal against the Chozha clan. It was
only Goddess Durga Devi who happens to be the presiding deity of your clan as
well as ours, saved me from that heinous sin. I will have to express my gratitude
to that Goddess. Please be kind, Your Majesty. Listen to me without trying to
interrupt me.”

The Emperor knew that nobody could stop him from talking. Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar started a long narration.

He told the assembly how he met Nandini literally on the road some three years
ago and how he lusted for her beauty. He also told them how he neglected the
sane counsel given by his brother, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. It was only at the
instance of Nandini did he want to stake a claim on behalf of Madhuranthakan.
And it was only on her advice he conspired against the Emperor along with the
other chieftains. He described the mid-night assembly of the conspirators that
was held in the Kadambur Palace and how Madhuranthakan was taken there in a
covered palanquin.

He started doubting Nandini only when Vandhiya Thevan came into the scene.
He thought of the conspirators of the Pandya Kingdom. But even at that time his
vision was blocked by his lust for Nandini. It was only because he was caught in
the floods at the Coleroon River and overheard the conversation between the
conspirators he knew the true colours of Nandini. He also knew the conspirators’
plan and rushed to Kadambur to avert the disaster.

On the way he disguised himself as a Kalamuka and with the help of Idumban
Kari he entered the Kadambur Palace through the secret passage. There he hid
himself in the room where musical instruments were stored. He overheard the
conversation between Nandini and Karikalan. When his attention was distracted
by the conversation the Prince fell down dead. He rushed in to bear the Prince.
At that time the lights went off. Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was attacked by many
people. He became unconscious. He gained his senses only in the cave in the
Pachaimalai Hills. He then narrated how he came back from there.

“Your Majesty, I have betrayed the Chozha Clan. I am a traitor, Emperor. I
harboured the conspirators from the Pandya Kingdom in my own palace, of

course without knowing it. I let them steal gold from our treasury for their
conspiracy. The conspirators planned to kill you and your two sons on the same
day. You were saved by a dumb and a deaf woman who gave her life for you.
Ponniyin Selvan was saved by a five-sensed animal, an elephant. I tried to save
Adithya Karikalan. I failed, Your Majesty. I am therefore fully responsible for
the untimely death of Crown Prince, Adithya Karikalan. Now that I have failed
in my duty I will fulfil my vow of killing myself. I took that vow in the presence
of our Goddess Durga Parameswari.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar took the sword in his hand. Everyone knew what he was
about to do. They were shocked. Nobody dared to prevent the old man from
killing himself. Ponniyin Selvan slowly came near him and suddenly grabbed the
hand that was holding the sword.

“Please wait. It has been an established tradition that Pazhuvettaraiyars should
place the crown on the Emperor at the time of coronation. When I am crowned I
want you to do that honour to me with your blessed hand. Thereafter you can do
whatever you want to. Till then please be patient”

No wonder these words surprised the Emperor and all the Chieftains assembled
there.

Chapter 76: Vadavaaru Changed Its Course

Many characters in this great drama have been contradicting themselves. Many
are those who acted against their nature and qualities. That was not a character
flaw; that was how human beings were made. Once upon a time Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar led a political conspiracy. He even planned for a political coup;
but now he confessed his sins and was even ready to kill himself as a retribution
for what he had done.

Even Sambuvaraiyar went through a sea-change. When he first saw the lifeless
body of Adithya Karikalan his only aim was to escape form the blame. He even
went to the extreme of burning down his own palace for that purpose. He wanted
to quickly shift the blame to somebody else and entrusted the job to his son.
Now he knew that he was not blamed even by the Emperor, whose son had been
killed; now he knew the love his dear daughter had for Vandhiya Thevan. He
changed his mind and spoke the truth without defending his old friend, Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar.

Everybody believed that the person growing up in the palace was the real son of
the Queen Mother and that he was the real Madhuranthakan who was to be
crowned as Uthama Chozhan. There were reasons for it. The Chief Minister
knew the truth. Even then he wanted the false Madhuranthakan to be crowned.
Because he did not know the whole truth. Though the false Madhuranthakan was
not the son of Kandaraathithar he thought he was born to Sundara Chozhan and
Mandhakini. He came to know the truth only much later and that was the reason
he floundered in his opinion on succession.

The most disturbing contradiction happened in Prince Arulmozhivarman. He
never wanted to be the King. Suddenly he changed his mind and had declared in
the midst of people who mattered, “I want to be the King after my father.”

Needless to add this change was also caused by the change of circumstances.

In a way Prince Arulmozhivarman’s declaration surprised and even shocked the
members of that elite assembly. In another way it gave them peace of mind.
Everybody knew in the heart of their hearts that Ponniyin Selvan was the most
competent and the most qualified person to succeed Emperor Sundara Chozhan.
They also knew that the Chozha people wanted him to be their King. If
somebody else was made the King against the wishes of the people the
consequences could be quiet disastrous. They were all worried.

Even then nobody had the courage to say that Ponniyin Selvan should be
crowned; because they did not want to hurt the Emperor who wanted to give the
throne to Madhuranthakan.

So when Ponniyin Selvan himself volunteered to be the King and requested
Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar to place the crown on his head everyone was happy.

“That is a good decision. Fortunately taken by Prince Arulmozhivarman himself.
Thank God, we did not have to take difficult decision and earn a bad name from
the Emperor and some of the chieftains.” The assembly was happy and relieved.

Ponniyin Selvan had a rare magnetic power which made it impossible for those
near him to act against his wishes. Even the iron-hearted Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar
steadfast in his vows, when he confronted Ponniyin Selvan, bowed down to him
and welcomed him like a King.

It took some time for Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar to know what happened there. He
was about to kill himself; Ponniyin Selvan saved him at the nick of time. He

understood the import of his words. The words and actions of the Prince melted
him. His body shook. His voice was choked. Tears streamed from his eyes.

He steadied himself and spoke in a soft voice: “Ponniyin Selva, the gem of the
Chozha Clan! I cannot even begin to describe the happiness you have given me
by what you said just now. I was about to pray to you that you should become
the King. I had betrayed the Chozha clan and thus had forfeited my right to make
such a request. That was the reason I kept quiet on the issue of succession.

“Your grandfather’s brother, the saintly Emperor Kandaraathithar made an
arrangement for succession before he died. He insisted that only children born of
his brother should be crowned. Whatever we planned in secret went against the
wishes of your grand father’s brother. We wanted to treacherously crown
Madhuranthakan against the wishes of that saintly Emperor. Even your father
agreed. If only we had succeeded it would have the worst disaster for our
Empire. My heart trembles at the mere thought of such a dangerous condition.
Dear Prince, you have the right to sit on the throne presently occupied by your
illustrious father. You are the most qualified amongst all men to adorn the crown
of the Chozha clan. When you were a child I used to carry you on my shoulders.
I used to wonder at the signs on your body and the lines on your palm. I used to
tell you “You are going to be the Emperor for this whole world.”

You fell into River Cauvery from the boat, and Mother Cauvery lifted you up
from water and handed over back to us. I must have told that a hundred times to
my friends and relatives. It was only during the last three years that I was
blinded by lust, greed and treachery. I have betrayed you and your ancient
Chozha clan. Ponniyin Selva, I am no longer fit to adorn you with the Chozha
crown on your coronation day. My hands have lost the qualification to do that
holy job. The only holy responsibility I now have is to kill myself as a
retribution for my sins.”

“NO, NO. DON’T DO THAT. YOU SHOULD NEVER DO THAT.”

Several voices rose in favour of the Senior.

Emperor Sundara Chozhan spoke in a choked voice:

“Mama, what are you talking? What is that you want to do? What treachery you
have done? You have not betrayed us, Mama. You have not done anything
wrong. Instead of my sons you wanted my cousin Madhuranthakan to be
crowned. How can that be considered as betraying the Chozha clan?
Madhuranthakan, after all, has better right to the throne than my sons. If you
allow me to tell what’s there in my mind.. . “

Chief Minister did not let the Emperor finish the sentence.

“My Lord, the whole country wants Prince Arulmozhivarman to be the King.
The blessed son of Emperor Kandaraathithar who has been in hiding till now
also wishes the same. Ponniyin Selvan has also finally agreed. There is no point
in thinking differently on this issue.”

Chendan Amudhan, the new found Prince Madhuranthakan, endorsed:

“Even if you think differently I won’t accept it.”

“I second my son. There is no need for further deliberations.”- Queen Mother.

Emperor relented.

“Queen Mother, who can speak against your word? If that is God’s wish let it
happen. But Pazhuvettaraiyar trying to kill himself because he betrayed the
Chozha clan, is not right. His desire to crown your son cannot be considered as
betrayal to the clan, right?”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar cleared his throat:

“Please listen to me, Your Majesty. If only I had succeeded in my unholy
mission there could not have been a greater disaster to the Chozha Empire. I
wanted to kill myself without revealing what I did in the past. I did not want to
hurt my brother Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar who never thinks of anything else other
than the welfare of our Empire. But now I have hardened my heart and I am
going to tell the truth. Emperor, the person whom I thought was Emperor
Kandaraathithar’s son, the person whom I wanted to crown, is the son of our
enemy Veerapandiyan.”

“Oh My God!”

“It can’t be”

“It can never be.”

So many voices rose in the assembly.

“I know it will be difficult for you to digest this hard truth. Oh King of Kings, I
am pushed again to the sad state of sharing my humiliation with you all. The
woman whom I lusted for, the woman for whose beautiful face I became a slave,
the woman whom I made a despot of my palace, the woman who lived in my
palace for three years, she is the daughter of Veerapandiyan. I heard her telling
this to Adithya Karikalan. She came to Pazhuvur Palace only to avenge her
father’s death, She was biding her time to kill Karikalan. She and her fellow
conspirators had planned to kill Karikalan and place Veerapandiyan’s son,
Madhuranthakan, on the Chozha throne. It was because of the grace of our
presiding deity, Goddess Durga Parameswari that calamity did not happen.

“Goddess Durga sent Vandhiya Thevan to open my eyes, which had been
blinded by lust. It was only through him that I learnt several other terrible
secrets. I wanted to hear so many things from him. But this idiot Kandhanmaran
killed him and tossed his body in Vadavaaru floods. Idiot. Fool.”

The assembly was shocked by this sudden outburst. Kandhanmaran spoke in a
weak voice: “Anyhow Vandhiya Thevan belongs to that conspirators’ gang.
What’s wrong in my killing him?”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar cast an angry glance at him. Chief Minister spoke to
him.

”He claims to have killed Vandhiya Thevan. But we can’t be sure about it. He
could have killed somebody else.”

Parthibendran was sarcastic.

“If only River Vadavaaru changed its course, ran west and brought back the body
of the deceased, we’ll know the truth.”

“Who knows, Vadavaaru might change its course.” – Chief Minister.

As if to make his words almost literally true Vandhiya Thevan entered the
assembly with water dripping from his wet clothes. The frightened look in his
face, his clumsy appearance made the assembly think that a corpse propelled by
some magic spell walking into the hall.

“Aha! River Vadavaaru did change its course. It brought back the dead to life
and has left the place.”- Chief Minister.

After Ponniyin Selvan, Kunthavai and others left him Vandhiya Thevan was
depressed. He wanted to do heroic feats and make the world adore him; instead
his condition at that time made others pity him. He did not like his state. For him
the palace appeared to be a worse prison than the underground jail. Because of
Ponniyin Selvan they might not charge him of killing Karikalan. But people in
the palace would always doubt him. He would be looked down as the stain of
Karikalan’s murder would always cling to him. Princess Kunthavai’s sympathy
and compassion would stop there. His dream of marrying Ponniyin Selvan’s
sister would remain only as a dream. The women in the palace would treat him
as a condemned prisoner who secured the King’s pardon at the nick of time.
Vandhiya Thevan knew that the people in high places would always be fickle
minded. He was not sure how long would Ponniyin Selvan’s love last.

‘If only I had mounted on the horse near Amudhan’s hut by this time I would
have reached Kodikkarai. Why, I could have even reached Lanka. Who could
have gone on the two horses when he was attacked by the Doctor’s son? One
could be the mad man Karuthiruman. He was not really a mad man. He was a

very cunning fellow. Who could have gone with him? The old Prince
Madhuranthakan is not to be seen. Perhaps he could be the other man. There
was some rationale in those two people fleeing the country. People here will be
surprised to know the true identity of the old Madhuranthakan. If they both
safely reached .. . The one to whom the Pandya crown and opal necklace really
belonged will have them. With the help of Mahindan he would commence a war
to regain his lost country. I am the only one who can prevent that from
happening. What is the point in my hiding here in the ladies chambers of this
Palace?’

Vandhiya Thevan was restlessly pacing in his the room. He stood near the
window and looked outside. He was in a room in the first floor of the Palace.
Vadavaaru was flowing near the walls of the Palace. The outer wall of the Palace
at that point served as the outer wall of the Thanjavur Fort as well. If Vandhiya
Thevan could jump out of that window he would jump in River Vadavaaru. Or
else, he can scale down the wall, a more difficult alternative. Below the terrace
there were steps leading to the river, to enable the women of the palace bath in
the river. Vandhiya Thevan did not know how to reach the entrance that led to
those steps. The ladies in the palace and the maids would know the way. If
Vandhiya Thevan wanted to escape he should get out without their knowledge.
He was carefully exploring his escape routes when he witnessed that shocking
sight.

In the palace next to his a woman was running with her hair let loose. She
appeared to be a mad woman. Oh My God! Wasn’t that Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s garden? Vandhiya Thevan strained his eyes to look at the
running woman. Oh My God! Wasn’t that Manimekalai? What happened to her?
Why was she running like that? Vandhiya Thevan remembered the help he got
from her on the night Karikalan was killed. His heart swelled with inexpressible
gratitude.

Two old women were chasing Manimekalai. But they could not keep pace with
her. It was impossible for them to catch her. Meanwhile Manimekalai had come

near the outer wall of the Palace. She used the tree leaning on the wall to climb
up the wall. Oh My God! She had a shining knife in her hand. What was she
going to do? Oh My God! She fell headlong into the river.

Long back when Manimekalai and Nandini were struggling for life in
Veeranarayanapuram lake, Vandhiya Thevan went to lift Manimekalai; at the last
minute he was forced to lift Nandini. Manimekalai was terribly disappointed by
the last minute switch over. He could not forget the expression of fury and
disappointment on Manimekalai’s face on that day. Vandhiya Thevan could no
longer remain idle. He ran up to the terrace and then jumped into the river.

He struggled for a few minutes. When he regained his balance he looked around.
A little away from where he jumped were the steps, a small hall and an entrance
to the same. Manimekalai jumped into the river in the opposite direction a little
away from that place. The water was flowing towards him. If Manimekalai was
floating in water she should also be coming towards him.

Vandhiya Thevan struggled a lot to reach the river bank. He walked upstream.
Manimekalai was floating towards him. Was she alive? Or dead? Would he
suffer the misfortune of carrying the corpse of somebody who loved him for the
second time in his life? This woman loved him very intensely.

For some strange reason Vandhiya Thevan remembered the notes she played on
her Veena on the bank of Veeranarayana Lake some time ago. In the same way
the melodious notes floated in air towards him, Manimekalai’s body was floating
towards him now. Vandhiya Thevan was shattered.

He controlled his grief, sprang into water and bore Manimekalai on his hands.

Oh Gods, if you have some mercy left in you, please save the life of this girl. I
promise I will visit every temple in the Chozha country, fall on the floor and
prostrate before the presiding deity. Be it the shrine of Shiva or Vishnu, the Holy
Mother or Aiyanar, I will leave no temple out. I will visit every temple and
express my gratitude to every god who saves her. Please gods, please save the
life of this sweet, innocent girl.

With the prayer very intense in his heart Vandhiya Thevan brought Manimekalai
to the steps. Vandhiya Thevan was very weak. The spear-attack had drained him
of all his energy. Added to that his sudden plunge into water and lifting
Manimekalai who weighed much more because she had been in water for some
time, exhausted him. He was gasping for breath. He was sure that he could not
walk even one step more. The first step was a little broader than the rest.
Vandhiya Thevan placed Manimekalai there. He thought for sometime. The
flame of life had not been put off in Manimekalai. But he could not resuscitate
her. He did not have the energy for the act. He decided to seek the help of a
woman to revive Manimekalai. But there was nobody around. He had to go into
the Palace to bring a woman to that place.

Vandhiya Thevan saw the gate that led to the palace. It was closed. He used all
his remaining strength and threw himself on the door. The door was bolted from
inside. It could not bear the sudden attack and gave away. He ran through the
door. It was a narrow path. He could not see anybody around.

“Anybody here? I urgently need somebody to save the life of a woman.” He
screamed as he ran. He was blocked by guards at what appeared to be the
entrance of a large hall. He pushed them away and barged in. There he saw the
Emperor seated in his wonderful throne surrounded by many men and women.
When he recognised Poonkuzhali he shouted at her: “Samudra Kumari! Samudra
Kumari! Manimekalai has fallen in to the river. Please come with me. Please
save her. Please... “

Vandhiya Thevan screamed.

Chapter 77: The Great Tree Fell Down

Vandhiya Thevan entered the Royal Court through the gate normally used by the
women of the Palace. That was the reason he first saw the women in the
assembly. Poonkuzhali was standing behind everybody else. She was the first to
turn around, startled by the sound made by Vandhiya Thevan. When she saw
Vandhiya Thevan fully drenched and all messed up she was shocked. Vandhiya
Thevan told her about how Manimekalai’s accident... Vandhiya Thevan’s words
were heard by Poonkuzhali, Kunthavai and Vanathi. All the three women rushed
out of the hall. They could easily trace back Vandhiya Thevan’s steps because
his route had been clearly marked with the water dripping from his wet clothes.

Vandhiya Thevan’s words were not heard by others in the Court Hall. They
heard the word “Save”. Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran who were far away
from him did not even hear that word. They just heard a scream.

Those two first thought that it was Vandhiya Thevan’s ghost. In those days many
people believed that those who had an unnatural death would hover in the world
as a ghost. Vandhiya Thevan’s sudden arrival in the assembly venue could not
have been timed better. No sooner than the Chief Minister uttered “Who knows,
Vadavaaru might change its course.” Vandhiya Thevan emerged as if from
nowhere, with wet clothes, as if he had just come out of the river which had
changed its course. That made the two men hallucinate that it was his ghost.

When the guards came in and held Vandhiya Thevan the hallucination
disappeared. The guards pleaded with the Emperor.

“Your Majesty, please forgive us. This mad man ran through the entrance gate to

the River. We tried our best to stop him. We could not.” They tried to pull
Vandhiya Thevan away from the assembly hall.

‘Oh My God! This man is like a cat which has the proverbial nine lives. He gets
away from every attempt on his life and comes back alive.’ This thought made
Parthibendra Pallavan furious.

‘The idiot has been running away and without knowing where he is headed he
has come here to the Royal Court sealing all chances of his escape. I won’t allow
him to escape again. ‘

Parthibendran forgot for a moment that the Emperor was holding court in that
hall. He sprang to Vandhiya Thevan and firmly held his shoulder.

“He is not a mad man, Your Majesty; he is a murderer. He is the one who killed
Adithya Karikalan. He is a traitor.” Parthibendran asked the guards to move
away.

Kandhanmaran ran up to Vandhiya Thevan and firmly held his other shoulder.
They both dragged Vandhiya Thevan and brought him before the Emperor.

The Emperor looked at the tired face of Vandhiya Thevan.

“This man has the innocent face of a child. And you say he killed my son. I can’t
believe that. He is the one who brought me a message from Adithya Karikalan.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar charged Vandhiya Thevan with a series of offences.

“Yes, Your Majesty. He brought the message. He met Nandini Devi outside the
Fort when she was in her closed palanquin. He is the one who escaped from the
Fort earlier. And now he escaped from the underground jail.”

“He stabbed me on my back and ran away like a coward.” Kandhanmaran added
to the charges.

Chief Minister: “But didn’t you say a little while ago that you threw a spear on
him and killed him?”

“Yes, I did. But I never thought that you would have saved him from death and
brought him alive to the Palace.”

Ponniyin Selvan was frozen. He thought that Vandhiya Thevan tried to escape
from the Palace once again and had jumped into the river. As he was not a good
swimmer he must have struggled for life and would have got to the bank not
knowing that he had reached the Palace. He must have run blindly and must
have by mistake entered the Royal Court. Ponniyin Selvan was furious. It took
some time for him to cool down.

But when he heard the last words of Kandhanmaran he stood up and walked up
majestically and stood near Vandhiya Thevan. He addressed his father, the
Emperor.

“Father, this is the Prince of Vallam and my best friend. He is the one who saved
my life when I was in Lanka and when I had fever in mid-sea. I am happy that
he is alive. Accusing him of the murder of my brother is equivalent to accusing
me.”

The majesty in his voice silenced the assembly.

Chief Minister spoke:

“Ponniyin Selva, I request you to reconsider your views. This man is said to
have been killed by Kandhanmaran. Somehow he has come back alive. They are
accusing him of murder. Should we not enquire him to ascertain the truth?”

Parthibendran addressed Ponniyin Selvan in a vengeful voice

“Prince, you are going to ascend the Chozha Throne. As the Emperor you have
unconditional right to either punish him or pardon him. But is it right to avoid a
proper enquiry? Will it not give place to unnecessary doubts and unfounded
rumours?”

Kandhanmaran added fuel to the fire.

“The Prince should also consider another dimension of this problem. There is a
rumour spreading fast that Prince Arulmozhivarman engaged Vandhiya Thevan
to kill his own brother so that he can be the King. We should not give room to
such bizarre rumours.”

The assembly was stunned into silence. Sambuvaraiyar came up to his son and
slapped him on his face.

“Idiot! You are going to destroy our ancient clan. If there is ever a competition of
saying the dumbest things in the most inappropriate place you will win the first
prize hands down.”

Kandhanmaran stared at his father. His lips were quivering. Nobody could have
guessed what he could have said or done the next minute.

But fortunately Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar ran up to them and held Sambuvaraiyar
in his hand. He cleared his throat noisily as before and spoke:

“Sambuvaraiyar, your son has compensated all his foolish deeds. He has done a
great service to the Chozha clan. If you know what he did you will be very proud
of your son. Please be patient. Control yourself.”

He pulled Sambuvaraiyar away from his son. Then he talked to Kandhanmaran:

“You said that you threw a spear on this Vandhiya Thevan and killed him. Do
you know for sure that he was the one who crossed the river on a horse back?”

Chief Minister: “Please allow my disciple to have a word on this issue.”

Azhwarkkadian came forward: “Honourable Assembly, I have come here to
admit my guilt. Vandhiya Thevan did not escape on a horse back. He saved the
life of Chendan Amudhan, the real Madhuranthakan and in the process he was
grievously injured. I carried him in a closed palanquin into the Fort on that night.
He has been here in this Palace for the last four days. So Kandhanmaran could
not have thrown the spear on this man.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar added: “I too guessed that, Sambuvaraiyar. You forgive
all the follies of your son. He has done a tremendous service to the Chozha clan.
The person he killed must be the son of Veerapandiyan who grew up here as the
false Madhuranthakan. We have not seen the old Madhuranthakan since that
evening. So the person who tried to run away on a horse must be him. God has
saved this Empire from great disaster. Through you.”

Before the assembly could recover from the shock of his revelations the old man
continued to reveal more shocking information:

“Your Majesty, please listen to the last words coming from me. The comet
Dhoomakethu has done its part and has vanished. Your valiant son Adithya
Karikalan has gone to heaven to live with your illustrious ancestors. But this
Empire which grew by the blood and sweat of your ancestors and mine still has a
bright future. This Empire is going to thrive for many, many years. Our Empire
is going to spread, expand and attain a state of glory unheard of in the past. That
is the reason the Empire has been saved from dangers, the likes of which we
have not even read in works of fiction.

“If I am asked to name one person who saved our Empire from catastrophe I
would name this valiant young man, the Prince of Vallam, Prince Vandhiya
Thevan. He opened my eyes which had been blinded by lust for my young wife.
We held a midnight assembly at the Kadambur Palace. Somehow this young man
was there at that time. I felt ashamed that I was doing something and trying to
hide that from this young man. Then my brother told me that Vandhiya Thevan

met my wife Nandini outside the Fort and talked to her. My brother also told me
that he escaped from the Fort only with the help of my wife. I started doubting
her fidelity.

“That was when I started thinking seriously about what was happening around
me. Now and then my reasoning was clouded by illusion and lust. But then soon
those clouds would be dispelled by the bright rays of truth. At last thanks to the
grace of Goddess Durga Parameswari I learnt about the conspiracy perpetrated
by the former bodyguards of the slain Pandya king, Veerapandiyan. If I had not
overheard their conversation myself I would not have believed that.

“Your daughter Princess Kunthavai confused me by saying that Nandini is her
sister and extracted a promise from me that I should not harm her. I thought
perhaps she too could have been deceived. I wanted to go to Kadambur in
disguise to know the truth. The sect of Kalamuka Saivites had made me their
leader.

“I am really embarrassed to reveal this to this elite assembly. Nandini had
planted in me the seeds of desire – that I should become the next Chozha
Emperor. The Kalamuka sect fanned that desire in me. They suggested that I
should crown Madhuranthakan for namesake, drive him away after sometime
and usurp the throne to myself. One of the Kalamukas, Idumban Kari, was
working at the Kadambur Palace at that time. He was also a spy working for the
Pandya conspirators. I threatened Idumban Kari and made him to reveal a
secret: the Pandya conspirators were hiding in the Hunters’ Hall at the Kadambur
Palace waiting for the right time to kill Karikalan. I learnt that Adithya Karikalan
had gone to Nandini’s chambers. I also learnt that Vandhiya Thevan and
Manimekalai were already there.

“I had a burning desire to listen to the conversation between Nandini and
Karikalan. I wanted to know the secret. This desire of distracted me and diluted
my determination. I also wanted to know more about Nandini.

“I knew there was a secret way to reach Nandini’s chambers through the room
where the musical instruments were stored. I went there at the right time. I heard
the truth about Nandini in her own words. I learnt that Prince Adithya
Karikalan’s character was unblemished. I also understood that Nandini and her
gang had come there to avenge the death of Veerapandiyan. I wanted to sabotage
their plans. But I could not win over Destiny. I had the greatest misfortune of
seeing Karikalan falling dead.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar closed his face and tried to muffle a sob. The sound was
that of the waves in a turbulent sea. Nobody dared to speak. The hearts of those
in that assembly bled for the old man.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar muffled his sobs after a great effort and strained himself
to continue to speak. He looked around.

“Adithya Karikalan died because of the power of destiny. But because of the
grace of Goddess Durga Parameswari Ponniyin Selvan escaped from an attempt
on his life. He won over his destiny with his intelligence. Your Majesty, Chief
Minister, my dear chieftains, I beg of you, please make Ponniyin Selvan the
King. Let him ascend this mighty throne. The Empire is going to attain glory
under his rule.”

Chief Minister spoke to him in a pacifying tone:

“Please don’t worry. Your wish will be honoured. The only block till now was
Ponniyin Selvan refusing the throne. It is out good fortune that he has now
consented to be the King. But you have not told us how Karikalan died.”

“Why do you ask, Minister? Should we bother about whose hands did that sinful
act so long as we are clear that his death was caused by the force of destiny.” –
The voice of Senior was shaky.

“Unless we know whose hands killed the Prince we cannot clear the name of
this young man, Vandhiya Thevan. He might be punished for the death of
Adithya Karikalan.”

“Oh My God! Does anybody blame this young man? Who the hell are they?”

“Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran.”

“Idiots! Fools! Kandhanmara! Parthibendra! Why do you blame this young man?
How do you say that he killed Karikalan?”

The two young men were silent. Chief Minister spoke for them.

“See this young man was hiding in Nandini’s chambers at that time.
Manimekalai was with him. Manimekalai says that she killed the Prince. That
can’t be true. We did not see any sign of blood in the knife she held in her hand.
So we have to infer that she said so only to shield Vandhiya Thevan. Probably
she might have seen Vandhiya Thevan killing Karikalan from his convenient
hiding place.”

“If Manimekalai did not kill how could have Vandhiya Thevan killed? What

weapon did he use?”

“This weapon. This knife with a twisted blade which still has a blood stain on
it.” Parthibendra Pallavan showed the knife to Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

Vandhiya Thevan carried the body of Karikalan from the burning palace and
placed it on the yard. He had fainted soon thereafter. Parthibendran had retrieved
the knife from him and had been saving that weapon for an opportunity like this.

“Give me that knife. Let me have a look.” Senior got the knife from
Parthibendran.

He examined it carefully.

“Yes, this is Idumban Kari’s knife.”

Then he roared to the two young men.

“Kandhanmara, Parthibendra, you should go around Vandhiya Thevan three
times and then fall at his feet. You two were caught in the seductive net of
Nandini in the same way I was. Vandhiya Thevan was the only man who could
not be lured by that devil. He never threw this knife. Nor did he kill Karikalan.”

“How are you so sure?” – Chief Minister.

“I am sure. I know who threw this knife and killed Karikalan.”

“WHO? WHO?”

“Finally the time has come to tell the truth. If I don’t tell the truth your doubts
will not be cleared.. This young man Vandhiya Thevan was hiding in the musical
instrument room. I came through that room. I did not want him to scream on
seeing me. I held his neck from behind and tried to wring it. He became
unconscious and fell down. He could not have even known who killed Adithya
Karikalan.”

“Who killed the Prince?”

“I got this knife from Idumban Kari. I was the one who threw this knife. Yes,
this right hand of mine threw the killer weapon. Yes, the right hand with which
the clan of Pazhuvettaraiyars used to place the crown on the head of the Chozha
Emperors threw the knife. The knife was aimed at that devil Nandini who lured
me into the path of treachery and betrayal. It was not aimed at Adithya
Karikalan. But somehow the knife missed its mark and landed on the heart of
Karikalan.”

“NO, NO.”

“OH MY GOD!”

“AHA!”

Several voices were heard in the assembly.

“I have brought shame to the Pazhuvur Clan which has been serving the Chozha
clan for more than a hundred years. I don’t know how I can remove that.”

“Anna, I will remove the shame and dishonour.” Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar roared,
unsheathed his sword and came near his brother.

“Anna, you and I have vowed that we shall kill any one who betrays the Chozha
clan. I will fulfil the vow on your behalf. I will kill you this very moment and
remove the stain of shame and dishonour that has come to our clan because of
you.”

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar lifted the sword high.

Emperor shouted: “No, Commander. No bloodshed here.”

Arulmozhivarman and the Chief Minister sprang to that place and firmly held
the hands of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar spoke in a voice drained of all emotions:

“My dear brother, I won’t entrust that work to you – the one of removing the
stain of shame and dishonour. If you kill me the whole world will accuse you of
killing your own brother. I don’t want you to be blamed on my account. I will
fulfil the vow I took before my Holy Mother Durga Parameswari.”

Senior lifted the small knife with twisted blade above and aimed at his own
heart. Senior had unsheathed his sword earlier to kill himself. But then he had
placed the sword back in its place. So people in the assembly thought that Senior
had abandoned his intention of killing himself. They never thought that he would
use the knife he got from Parthibendran on himself.

“PLEASE! DON’T. I BEG OF.. .”

Before Arulmozhivarman could run to his side Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar had
completed the act.

He fell down on the floor of the Royal court. It was like a large Devadharu tree
with firm roots and many leafy branches being felled by the wood-cutters.

There were expression of shock and dismay from the members of the assembly.
Some ran to the fallen Pazhuvettaraiyar.

Some ran to the Emperor who had fainted on his throne. The assembly was
dissolved.

On the same night when Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar was struggling for life many

people went to see him. The Emperor, Chief Minister, Prince Arulmozhivarman
and Princess Kunthavai were with him for a long time. They praised the glorious
service rendered by the Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar to the Chozha clan. Some
praised his acts of valour on the battlefield. When the Chozha army was almost
defeated at the Thakkolam warfront it was Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar who gathered
the soldiers running for their lives, made them fight again and changed the defeat
into a stunning victory. They also praised his efficient administration of the
Chozha Treasury. Nobody talked about what happened during the last three years
of his life.

Then the four – Emperor, Minister, Arulmozhi and Kunthavai – hid themselves
in a place where Senior could not see them.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar brought Azhwarkkadian into the room. He made him sit
near Senior. Junior also sat down by his side.

Life was gradually ebbing out of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. His eye-sight was
failing. Even then he recognised Azhwarkkadian.

“Why did this Vaishnava come here? Thambi, I don’t want to go to the abode of
Lord Vishnu. I want to go the abode of Lord Shiva.”

Azhwarkkadian was mischievous even at that time.

“Tomorrow is Vaikunta Ekadasi, a holy day for the Vaishnavites. So even if you
want to go to your Lord’s abode you will have to go through my Lord’s abode.”

“No, no. You go back to your Lord Vishnu and.. “

“No, I have not come here as my Lord’s messenger. I have brought a message
from my sister.”

“Who is your sister?”

“The one who grew up with me for many years, I mean Nandini. Nandini asked
me to thank you on her behalf. She wanted me to thank you for putting the
blame of killing Karikalan on your head to save her. She also told me that she
will remember your love in all her births.”

“Oh, she thinks like that! Let her be happy. She has betrayed me and has
destroyed me. And yet I cannot forget her. After all she is the daughter of that
divine lady who gave her life to save the life of our Emperor. I am afraid she will
come searching for me in my future births.”

The shadow of Death was glaringly visible on the old man’s face. That was
contrasted by a bright smile.

“Vaishnavite, after all I need to tell the truth to somebody. Let me tell you. The
knife I threw did not land on the Prince. Even before that he had fallen dead. I
lied not to save Nandini. There is another reason which is a hundred times
stronger. Come closer. I will share it with you. Your friend Vandhiya Thevan is a
nice young man. The entire Chozha clan is indebted to him. Princess Kunthavai
has lost her mind to him. Because of that devil Nandini I started hating our
Princess, who is like an angel.

“When I realised the truth I wanted to something good for her. So I put the
blame on myself and sacrificed my life. If I had not done that somebody would
go on blaming Vandhiya Thevan for the murder of Karikalan. My confession has
silenced them forever. No one can blame that noble soul. Vaishnava, I have a
request. Someday in future ask Princess Kunthavai to forgive this old man for I
hated her and worked against her. Will you?”

The old man had been speaking for a long time. He was struggling to breathe.
Even the hard hearted Azhwarkkadian melted on hearing his words. No wonder
Kunthavai was struggling hard to muffle the sobs trying to escape from her
mouth. It appeared that the tears streaming from her eyes would never stop.

“Vaishnavite, please tell this to the Chief Minister. Somehow we have to bring
the Pandya Crown and the opal necklace from Lanka. The only person who can
do that great feat is Vandhiya Thevan. You can go with him on this great
mission. Soon after they are brought here go to Madurai and have the coronation
of Ponniyin Selvan once again. Adorn him with the Pandya Crown and the opal
necklace gifted by the chief of gods.
I have a suggestion for Prince Arulmozhivarman. Tell him that Vandhiya Thevan
is the greatest blessing that has happened to the Chozha clan. Devi Durga
Parameswari, I have fulfilled my vow. I am now coming to you. Please save the
Chozha clan.”

Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s voice was gradually becoming weaker and weaker. At
one point the voice stopped. The light of life was put off. Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar was dead.

Chapter 78: The Parting Of Friends

Four horses were galloping towards River Coleroon. There were four warriors
riding them – Parthibendran, Kandhanmaran, Vandhiya Thevan and Ponniyin
Selvan. The first two were to get into a boat and cross the river. The other two
had come to see them off. As soon as the horses reached the boat jetty the
warriors dismounted.

Ponniyin Selvan spoke in a mischievous voice:

“Kandhanmara, I am sure all your anger and hostility towards your old friend is
gone now.”

“Why should I be angry with him? I am angry over my foolishness. He forgot
all the harm I caused him and was kind enough to accept me as his friend again.
There is nothing comparable to his magnanimity. He saved my sister from
drowning in the River. Do you think, Prince, that I can repay that debt within a
single life time? I am quite surprised to find how my thinking went so bad. I was
a fool. I should have given my sister to him as I originally panned. If only I had
done that she would not have lost her mind.”

“How do you conclude that she has lost her mind? She is a little disoriented;
that’s all. And that’s because of the shock caused by sudden fall in water. She
will be fine soon.”

“Prince, I don’t think that this is an ordinary disorientation. She remembers
everybody else and everything else. But she cannot recognise me and Vandhiya

Thevan. When I think of the love she had for me once. . Oh My God.. my heart
will burst. Her scream is still ringing in my ears: “ I killed my dear brother with
my own hands.”

“Why should she scream like that? You are after all alive, aren’t you?”

“I am, Prince. It would have been better if I had died. She is convinced that I
killed Vandhiya Thevan and she has killed me. At times she cries for me. At
times she mourns the death of my friend. She wails: “Will the river change its
course? Will the river bring back the dead?” I have been screaming into her ears
that Vandhiya Thevan is alive. She does not recognise me as her brother. Nor can
she recognise Vandhiya Thevan. She asks Vandhiya Thevan, “Who are you?
Have you seen the Prince of Vallam?”

“Oh My God!”

Ponniyin Selvan turned to Vandhiya Thevan. He saw tears in his eyes.

“How sad! If only she knows that Vandhiya Thevan is no longer the Prince of
Vallam, but the King of Vallam, how happy she will be!” Parthibendran added.

Kandhanmaran looked at Prince Arulmozhivarman with a look of surprise.

“Yes. The Emperor has decided to give back the Vanakappadi Kingdom to your
friend and make him the King of Vallam. He has also decided to make a gift to
you, Kandhanmara – the area near Vallam once ruled by Vaithumbarayas. You

two will be neighbours hereafter. Your friendship should continue as before.”

“There is no limit to Emperor’s kindness. So I don’t have to go back to
Kadambur?” Kandhanmaran was quite enthusiastic.

“No need. Your old palace has been completely burnt down. If you go there you
will be disturbed by old memories. You build a new Palace on the southern
banks of River Paalaru. As soon as your sister is cured she will join you there.”

“Prince, I don’t think Manimekalai will consent to come back to us. Your
grandmother, I mean Queen Mother Sembianmadevi has plans to take her along
on her pilgrimage. Manimekalai likes the Queen Mother very much. Even today
Queen Mother has taken my sister to Thiruvaiyaaru.”

“Yes, they have gone as a large group. My uncle Madhuranthakan, I mean
Chendan Amudhan, and his bride Poonkuzhali have also gone there. The beauty
is now I have to call Samudra Kumari as my aunt and address her reverentially
as Chitthi.”

Parthibendran added.

“I have never heard of a simpler marriage in the Chozha clan than the recent one
– between Madhuranthakan and Poonkuzhali.”

“My coronation ceremony will be simpler still.” – Ponniyin Selvan.

“Impossible.” – screamed Vandhiya Thevan.

“What do you say as impossible? My coronation?” Ponniyin Selvan acted as if
he was shocked.

Vandhiya Thevan was a tad embarrassed.

“No, Prince. I said that I won’t let your coronation be simple. People have
already started discussing how grand it will be.”

“Prince, do you want us to miss the grand occasion? Why are you sending us up
north at this time? I heard the people talking – that as soon as the Tamil Month
of Thai (Jan 15th to Feb 15th) is born the date will be set for your coronation.
Vandhiya Thevan will be here to celebrate your coronation. He is a lucky fellow,
Prince.”

“No. I am sending Vandhiya Thevan to Srilanka. One thing is for sure. My
coronation will never happen without you, my dear friends.” Ponniyin Selvan
was unusually firm.

“Thanks a lot Prince. As soon as the day is fixed send word through a horseman.
We will be here well on time.” – Kandhanmaran.

“You need not have to worry about it, my friend. Believe me, I will never
consent to be crowned in your absence. Remember that I am not going to be
crowned to have happy time in the moonlit yards and the bedrooms of the

Palace. Ever since I had been to Lanka I have some dreams about our country. I
have shared them with you. I don’t mind repeating it once again. During my
reign my country should attain greater glory than what it did during the reign of
my great grand father, Emperor Paranthaka. The Empire should expand on all
the four sides. Our Chozha Army should go north up to the banks of River
Ganges, go East up to Srivijeyam and hoist our Tiger Flag there. In the west our
army should conquer the Hill Country and go up to Lakshadweep. A Chera King
has suddenly appeared in the Hill Country. In the same way some Pandya King
will appear in the Pandya Kingdom. The Lankan Kings always give support to
these new Chera and Pandya Kings. So our mission will be to find out the
Lankan King Mahindan and his army who are hiding in the caves of Lankan hills
and destroy them. We should bring Lanka under our rule. It is not enough if we
just go on an expansion spree. We should build great temples for Lord Shiva and
Vishnu which should outclass the large Buddha Sthoopas in Lanka in size,
majesty and stature. People born in this great country a thousand years from now
should be awed by our achievements. All these dreams should happen in my life
time. I want each one of you to help me in my mission.

“Parthibendra, I have given you the highest post in the Chozha Army, the
Commander of our Northern Forces. You will be succeeding my illustrious elder
brother Adithya Karikalan to this post. You should discharge your great
responsibilities to the best of your abilities. Karikalan’s untimely death has
planted many desires in the hearts of our enemies. The Vengi King and the King
of Rashtrakoot are keenly watching us for signs of internal conflicts and civil
war. Our soldiers under your command at the North Pennai Border should be
like an iron curtain. Pallava Prince, make Kandhanmaran the Commander at
North Pennai and then go to Kancheepuram. Your first duty there will be to
renovate the golden palace built by my brother. Make it fit for my parents to live.
The Emperor wants to leave for Kanchi the moment he places the crown on my
head.”

Kandhanmaran was in tears. “ My Lord , I am yet to prove myself in a
battlefield. Why are you in a hurry to make me the Commander of the Border
Force? Am I qualified for that high post?”

“My dear Friend, Almighty God has given some special powers to me. One of
them is to find out who is fit for which job. I have given you the charge of
Northern Frontier. And I am making Vandhiya Thevan the commander of our
forces in Lanka. I am confident that you will do well in your new assignment.”

Parthibendran added in a tone of sarcasm:

“My Lord, in a way it is good that one of these two is in the Northern Frontier
and the other is in the Southern Frontier in Lanka. If they are in the same place,
my Lord, and if you are also not there they might start fighting with each other.”

“That will never happen, my Lord.”

Kandhanmaran came near Vandhiya Thevan.

“My dear friend, have you forgiven my wrongs? “

Vandhiya Thevan did not reply. Instead he stretched his hands and held
Kandhanmaran in a tight hug.

The friends remained silent for sometime shedding tears.

Then Parthibendran and Kandhanmaran got into the boat that was waiting for

them.

Ponniyin Selvan and Vandhiya Thevan were looking at the boat till it crossed
half the distance. Then they turned back, mounted their horses and galloped
towards Thanjavur.

Chapter 79: The Meeting On The Road

The whole of Chozha Empire knew that the coronation ceremony of Ponniyin
Selvan would be held soon. Without any exception everybody in the country,
rich and poor, young and old were eagerly looking forward to the great event.

Emperor Sundara Chozhan was upset over a series of calamities that happened in
the country – the untimely death of his first born, Adithya Karikalan,
Mandhakini sacrificing her life to save his and finally to cap it all his most
trusted lieutenant Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar killing himself to fulfil his solemn
vow. The only silver lining in his otherwise dark cloud was the peaceful
resolution of the issue of succession with all the chieftains, ministers and
subjects unanimously accepting the coronation of Ponniyin Selvan as the next
Chozha Emperor.

The Emperor was waiting for the Tamil Month of Thai (January 15th) to set a
date for Arulmozhivarman’s coronation ceremony. He would then place the
burden on his son’s able shoulders and move over to Kancheepuram. He had
made up his mind to spend his last days at the golden palace built by his valiant
son, Adithya Karikalan. No wonder the Emperor preferred a simple ceremony
without much of a fanfare.

Prince Arulmozhivarman too preferred a simple, solemn ceremony. Towards this
end the Prince had decided not to go in the midst of people till he was officially
crowned.

After seeing off Kandhanmaran and Parthibendran, Ponniyin Selvan and
Vandhiya Thevan returned to Thanjavur. The road to Thanjavur went through the

town of Thiruvaiyaaru. If they chose that route they were likely to be mobbed by
the people of that town. The two friends therefore chose a little roundabout route
avoiding the town of Thiruvaiyaaru. They travelled a little towards west and
crossed River Cauvery. As soon as they reached the Kudamurutti River they took
the Royal High Road that ran along the bank of that river to the capital.

The period was the Tamil month of Margazhi, corresponding to the third or the
fourth week of December. Five rivers flowed through the area they travelled.
The scenery they saw around was too good for words.

They had seen the rivers in full floods. But now the water flow was moderate.
They could see the river bed in some places. The river was flowing at half of its
full level. That was much more beautiful than the full flow. On both the banks of
the river they could see coconut, plantain and areca nut groves. Where there
were no groves there were rich and fertile paddy fields. The paddy plants were
ripe for harvest. Laden with the weight of full grown corn the paddy plants
leaned on one side. In the canals and waterways that ran through the rich green
fields one could see lotus, lily and sengazhuneer flowers in full blossom. The
scenery was so surreal that it looked like a painting.

Vandhiya Thevan was amazed by what he saw. Ponniyin Selvan saw the
expression on his face.

"My dear friend, can there be a country half as beautiful and fertile than our
Chozha Kingdom? What a good fortune to be crowned as the Emperor of this
great country! I am surprised to think that till a little while ago I refused to be the
King of this wonderful country.”

“I am not surprised, Prince. I have heard from elders that people in high places
are prone to vacillation. They would change their minds quite often.”

“You are a bad man. And an ungrateful man too. I have made you the
Commander of our army to be stationed in Lanka. You have not thanked me.
Added to that you call me fickle minded.”

“What is hated amongst ordinary people might become a praiseworthy trait
amongst Kings. You condemn a person to death today. Tomorrow you pardon
him and make him your Commander. This kind of instability is welcome. This
makes the King famous. People would only praise you, “Our Emperor is very
compassionate.”

“The fickle mind might work in the opposite direction as well. Whosoever is
made a Commander today might be condemned to death tomorrow. Then what
will the people say?”

“They will praise the King as fair and just. They will call him a reincarnation of
the great Manu Neethi Chozhan who killed his son to render justice to a cow.”

Ponniyin Selvan laughed.

“Then I can take back the Vanakappadi Kingdom and the Lankan Commander
post. You won’t be angry or even surprised, right?”

“I won’t be surprised or even disappointed, Prince. Even now I have a doubt. I
don’t know whether you are sending me to Lanka to give me a high post or to
keep me away from this beautiful Chozha Kingdom.”

“Honestly, my friend, I want somebody as intelligent as you as my Chief
Minister and keep you close to me all my life. But I don’t think that Chief
Minister Aniruddha Brahmarayar would give up his post for your sake.”

“If that is the only issue then I can talk to the Chief Minister.”

Prince Arulmozhivarman laughed.

“No. There are other reasons too.”

“I thought so.”

“What did you think?”

“Of late you think of something and talk something else.”

“King of Vallam, I command you to cite an example to substantiate your
charge?”

“Here you go, Prince. You know that your coronation is scheduled in the
beginning of the month of Thai. But then why did you tell those two people that
my coronation won’t happen without you two? Tell me Prince, what can I think
of you?”

Prince Arulmozhivarman laughed again.

“I had the policy of openly speaking out what’s in my mind. After becoming
friends with Vandhiya Thevan I am training myself in intrigues and strategies.”

“You are praising me in vain, Prince. There is no intrigue or strategy which you
do not know. There is nothing even remotely equal to what you spoke into the
ears of the elephant which made it run like mad or your coming into the Fort in
the guise of a mahout.”

“If you are interested you can now learn intrigues and the fine art of sorcery
from me.”

“You are afraid that I might learn too much. That’s why you are driving me away
to Srilanka.”

“My dear Friend, don’t you like to go to Lanka?”

“Who told you that, Prince? I am ready to go even to countries beyond Lanka if
you order me to go. I am ready to leave any time. Sooner the order comes
happier I will be.”

“Oh, you are happy in getting away from me, right?”

“Yes, Prince. I have come to the conclusion that it is safer to stay far away from
Kings and Emperors. If you stay away from then you can always be friends.”

“Then you are in for a disappointment.”

“Do you mean to say that however far I may go from you I cannot save the
friendship?”

“No, No. I only said that you cannot stay away from me for long. In a few days I
will join you in Lanka. I am planning to take you with me in my expedition to all
those fantasy lands and islands beyond the high seas. My only disappointment is
that we cannot take Samudra Kumari with us.”

“Prince, you learnt intrigues and strategies from me. And I learnt the hard lesson
of speaking only the truth from you. I have even taken a vow to speak only the
truth. I want to tell you what is truly in my mind.”

“Please go ahead.”

“You took the kingdom from my friend Chendan Amudhan who is now your
uncle Madhuranthakan. In a way that act can be justified. You can argue that
people want you to be the King. It is true. But if only you had snatched
Poonkuzhali from him, well, I can’t think of a worse betrayal than that. It can
never, never be justified. You should remember that Poonkuzhali is now the
lawfully wedded wife of Madhuranthakan.”

Ponniyin Selvan laughed.

“Looks like you have classed me with the demon Ravana who stole Lord Rama’s
wife.”

“ “

“I can understand your supporting your friend. But do you know what is in
Poonkuzhali’s heart? Did she willingly and whole-heartedly marry my uncle?”

“There is no doubt about it, my Lord. You might become the Emperor of this
Chozha Kingdome. You can bring the whole world under your rule. But you can
never, never compel Poonkuzhali to do something against her wishes. When I
learnt about the love Poonkuzhali had for the beloved son of Queen Mother I
was ecstatic. I have seen something equal to her love only in one other place.”

“Where did you find such love? If you can tell me about it I am all ears.”

“I saw it in Kodumbalur Princess Vanathi. Where else can I hope to find such
kind of love?”

“Lie. A damned lie. You are swerving from your policy of speaking only the
truth. Your spoken word does not truly reflect the thought in your mind.”

“I am speaking the truth, my Lord. I am speaking whatever is there in my mind.”

“Are you sure you have never seen such a love elsewhere?”

“Didn’t you hear me say, NO?”

“You evil man! You heartless devil. A woman has come forward to sacrifice her
life for you and she has lost her mind. Can’t you think of anything greater than
Manimekalai’s love for you?” Ponniyin Selvan was furious.

Vandhiya Thevan was silent for sometime. Then he spoke softly.

“My Lord you are twisting the truth now. I have compassion for Manimekalai. I
don’t deny that. I have cried for her. But I did not cause her madness. It was all
the work of her brother Kandhanmaran. Both of us are dead in the eyes of that
girl. What is the use in talking about her now?”

“I am sorry, I almost shouted at you.”

“I am not offended, my Lord. Nor am I surprised. I wanted to leave for Lanka as
early as possible only to avoid these sudden outbursts of anger.”

“Didn’t I say that there is another strong reason to send you to Lanka?”

“Yes, My Lord.”

“If you remain out of Manimekalai’s sight for some time and then come back she
might recognise you. My sister thinks so.”

“Now I know, my Lord that your sister is more eager to send me away than you.
See there. The person we were talking about is coming towards us.”

The friends were travelling along the bank of River Kudamurutti. They were
approaching the Royal High Road that went from Thanjavur to Thiruvaiyaaru.
They saw a palanquin on the road surrounded by guards and the usual retinue.

Princess Kunthavai and Princess Vanathi were in the Palanquin.

When they saw the two men riding the horses their eyes widened in surprise.
Their faces blossomed in happiness.

Chapter 80: Earth Maiden’s Lover

Ponniyin Selvan’s horse approached the palanquin that was carrying the
Princesses. Vandhiya Thevan stopped his horse a little away.

“Beware my Lord; the mischievous palanquin of the Princesses might hit our
innocent horses.”

Once almost at the same place Vandhiya Thevan made his horse hit a palanquin
and then shouted, “Your palanquin hit my horse.” Nandini was in the palanquin
at that time. He remembered the incident which had happened only six months
ago. But within that time so many things have happened. So many things have
changed. Almost upside down.

Kunthavai struggled hard to suppress the happiness caused by the words of
Vandhiya Thevan.

“Thambi, looks like you two were discussing something very happy. Your faces
radiate happiness.”

“Yes, Akka. We were discussing happy things. But I am afraid that might not
give happiness to your dear friend Vanathi. You know my wedding day is near.
We saw the woman I am going to marry. That made us quite excited, Akka. We
were discussing her beauty when we saw you. That explains the happiness in our
faces.”

The faces of both the women fell. Vanathi hung her head down. There was fury,
surprise, suspicion and a host of other feelings in Kunthavai’s face.

“What is this shameless talk, Thambi? What happiness can you derive by hurting
this girl?”

Vanathi lifted her head and saw Kunthavai. “What are you saying Akka? Why
should I be hurt by his words?”

Ponniyin Selvan remained silent and smiling. Kunthavai burst out.

“I know that you are returning from River Coleroon. Which girl did you see
there? Where? What’s her name? What’s her clan?”

Vandhiya Thevan spoke for both.

“Devi, we did not see the girl that the Prince is about to marry. We were
wondering at the beauty of this land-maiden, who is made fertile by the flow of
these five great rivers. We were discussing the tremendous beauty of the Chozha
country. The day our Prince is going to be made the King of this beautiful
country is not far. I am sure our Prince referred to the land-maiden – I mean our
Chozha country – with whom he is head over heels in love.”

“Aha! My brother never talked like this before. Perhaps this is your work. You
have taught him to talk in riddles.”

Prince Arulmozhivarman laughed.

“My dear friend you asked for it and you got it. Didn’t I tell you that I learnt all
these intrigues only from you? See my sister also thinks the same.”

“Very good. The brother and sister team is all out to level charges against me.”

“These are just starters. There are several other charges which my brother might
not have told you. But the middle of a busy road is not the right place to discuss
them.”

"I suspected something and it has happened.”- Vandhiya Thevan.

“What did you suspect?”

“I have been made the Commander of our Lankan Regiment. I suspected that it
was a punishment. Now I know I am right.”

“See, Sister, he thinks that we from the Chozha clan are ungrateful people.”

“It is true that we have not been grateful to him.”

“Akka, what happened to you? Why do you say that?”

“When strangers help we can be grateful to them. There is no need for gratitude
between friends. Don’t you remember the words of Saint Thiruvalluvar?
‘Swift as one’s hand to slipping clothes is a friend in need.’(Thirukkural 788)

Because the hand took the slipping clothes and placed them back, should the hip
thank the hand?”

“Devi, there is absolutely no need to thank me. If I am not punished I will
consider it as a great act of gratitude.”

“Thambi! You and this man should not forget something. Our brother, the one
who went to the heaven reserved for the bravest of brave sent him to help me. I
have not yet discharged him from the brief.”

“Akka, let us not release him. I will be happy if he is sentenced for life.”
Arulmozhivarman added.

“I want him to do something for me in Lanka.”

“Before I go I will come to take leave of you, Devi.”

“In that case you may have to come to Pazhaiyaarai.”

“That is all right, Akka. Where are you going now?”- Arulmozhivarman.

“To Thiruvaiyaaru. Today is an auspicious day. Today’s star is Thiruvaathirai
and this is the auspicious month of Margazhi. Sembianmadevi, Madhuranthakan
and Poonkuzhali went in the morning. Are you joining us?”

“No, Akka. We can’t come now. In fact we took the road along the western
banks of the river only to avoid getting into the town of Thiruvaiyaaru.”

“Saint Thirunavukkarasar found Lord Shiva’s abode in Thiruvaiyaaru and
attained bliss. You don’t like to go there. Perhaps you two have become
Vaishnava fanatics.”

“No, Akka. When we go to Thiruvaiyaaru we want to go like Saint
Thirunavukkarasar.”

“How did he go?”

“He has mentioned in one of his songs. “Without leaving a trace...” He did not
reveal his true identity. He mingled with the crowd of devotees who carried
flowers and water for the Lord. It was because of that humility that he could see
the abode of Lord Shiva in that town. If we go there with all this regal
paraphernalia we cannot see the Lord. Other devotees will forget the Lord and
try to have a dharshan of us.”

“The fault lies in your stars, Brother. As soon as people see you they surround

you, shouting slogans like “Hail Ponniyin Selvan!” “Hail The King of Kings!”
We do not have that problem. Again, we will never go in the crowd. When the
God comes out on the street in procession we will see him from the terrace of
our Palace.”

“Akka, do you remember an old song? I have forgotten the lines. But it runs like
this. God created the Universe, the great sky, the planets and the various stars.
How can we tie him to one star, Thiruvaathirai? Binding the Creator of the
whole universe to a single star is rank foolishness, says the song. Do you
remember the song, Akka?”

“I do, Thambi. If God owns all the stars, then he owns the star Thiruvaathirai
also. “

“You continue your journey, Akka. When do you plan to return to Thanjavur?”

"Not in the near future. We are going to Pazhaiyaarai from Thiruvaiyaaru.”

“What are you talking Akka? You two are not there for my coronation?”

“What role do we have in your coronation?”

“But my coronation won’t happen without you.”

“Why not? It will happen. Who set the date for your coronation? I am sure it is

not a person who was born in the clan of the priest who set the date for Lord
Rama’s coronation. It did not happen at that time. It was delayed by 14 years.”

“I don’t believe in auspicious day, star, astrology, anything. If we do our duty
then any day is an auspicious day. And if we laze around doing nothing any day
is a bad day.”

“Let all the days in your life be auspicious, brother. We will go to Thiruvaiyaaru
Temple and pray for your welfare to the presiding deity, Aiyaarappar and the
presiding Goddess, Aram Valartha Nayaki”

“What are you going to pray for me?”

“May your love for the land-maiden end in a happy, lasting marriage. May your
coronation be hassle-free. This will be our prayer to the presiding deity
Aiyaarappar. And to Goddess Aram Valartha Nayaki we will pray that your heart
shall not swerve from the righteousness which has always remained as the
hallmark of our ancient Chozha clan.”

“So you are not attending my coronation?”

“We will see it from Pazhaiyaarai through the eye of our hearts.”

“Akka, you are trying to support the obstinacy of this Kodumbalur Princess. She
thinks that if she refuses to ascend the throne with me the whole world will be
destroyed. Her adamant attitude is going to end in disaster. Some other girl is

going to sit on the throne in her place. Then there is no point in blaming me.”

Vanathi spoke after a long time.

“I have never blamed him, Akka. Nor will I ever do it in future.”

“Even if you blame him it won’t work. People who want to rule the land won’t
listen to sane counsel.”

“Akka, please don’t forget that it was you who planted the desire in me – the
desire to rule the country, the desire to good to the people, the desire to enhance
the glory of our Empire. Haven’t you told me several times that though you were
born a woman you never wanted to marry because you did not want to go out of
Chozha Empire?”- Arulmozhivarman.

“At that time you never listened to me. You kept on ranting that there were
several beautiful nations on this earth. But now thanks to the wrong advice given
by this Vaana Warrior you have got the desire to rule the land.”-Kunthavai.

“Oh My God! Should the blame always fall on me?” – Vandhiya Thevan.

“You were blamed for something much more serious. Compared to that this is
nothing. Sorry, Thambi, we have to go now. It’s time for the procession. Let us
go now.”

Kunthavai gave a signal to the palanquin bearers. The palanquin started to move.

Ponniyin Selvan stood there for some time staring the palanquin receding at a
distance. Then he directed his horse towards Thanjavur.

After some time he told Vandhiya Thevan: “Friend, I don’t think that the
Princesses are going to have a dharshan of the Lord at Thiruvaiyaaru. I learnt
that the famous Kudanthai Astrologer is now living near Thiruvaiyaaru. The
ladies are probably going to consult him.”

“My Lord, you seem to be a better astrologer than that Kudanthai man.”
Vandhiya Thevan smiled as he spoke these words.

Chapter 81: The Cat and The Parrot

Ponniyin Selvan’s guess was right. Kunthavai and Vanathi reached the Chozha
Palace at Thiruvaiyaaru. They learnt that Sembianmadevi, her son and her
daughter-in-law had gone to the temple. They left the palanquin and their retinue
there. They took a soldier for escort and went in search of Kudanthai astrologer’s
house.

After his house had been washed away by the flash floods in River Cauvery
Kudanthai Astrologer had shifted his base to Thiruvaiyaaru. He built a small
house for himself at the Eastern side of the city on the bank of River Cauvery
and lived there.

Perhaps he must have learnt astrologically that in the future years Thanjavur
would have greater importance than Pazhaiyaarai and accordingly shifted his
place of work near the happening place.

As the Princesses were entering the astrologer’s house a sweet voice welcomed
them.

“Welcome, beautiful dancers! Welcome, Dance Queens!”

The women were surprised. Earlier the astrologer used to have a ruffian as his
disciple. ‘Has he been replaced by somebody younger and sweeter?’ thought the
ladies. Their question was answered when they saw a beautiful green parrot in a
cage hanging from the ceiling. The parrot turned its little head this side and that,
as if it were nodding, and repeated the words of welcome.

“Welcome, beautiful dancers! Welcome, Dance Queens!”

The astrologer heard the voice of the parrot and the sound of the Princesses’
anklets. He came to the drawing room. He was clearly startled by the royal
visitors.

“Welcome Your Highness! Welcome Princess! The hut of this poor astrologer is
blessed only today.”

The parrot repeated the words of its master: “The hut of this poor astrologer is
blessed only today.”

The astrologer was annoyed. He shouted at the parrot. “Quiet. Shut up. Don’t
talk for some time.”

“Astrologer Sir, why do you abuse the parrot? It does its duty. It welcomes the
visitors. I am sure many people come here every day and they make this house
“blessed only today” Looks like Princesses and Queens come here virtually
every day.” – It was Kunthavai who was clearly in a mood to tease.

“Welcome, Dance Queens!” – the parrot repeated. Astrologer shouted at the
parrot again.

“Princesses, please forgive me. When Saint Thirugnanasambandar came to
Thiruvaiyaaru he saw dance floors on every street. Women were training to

dance. He heard the reverberating sounds of their anklets. There are many
dancers in this town today as they were in the days of the Saint. Those dancers
seek my professional help often. They are my good customers. I wanted to
please them and hence I have trained my parrot to speak those words of
welcome. Please forgive me.”

“But we can’t see any dance queens here today?”

“Today’s star is the auspicious Thiruvaathirai. It is festival time here. The Dance
Queens would have gone to the temple to serve the Lord. So what? In their place
I have got real-life Queens. The house is blessed; so am I.”

“ “

“Have your seat, please. You may ask this poor man whatever you want to. I will
answer to the extent I know.”

The women sat down. Kunthavai let out a sigh.

“What is there to ask, Astrologer? The first question that comes to my mind is:
“Is there any truth in astrology?”

“Devi, how can I answer that question? For those who believe, astrology is true
science. For those who do not, it is mere charlatanism.”

“I used to believe in astrology. But it has let me down.”

“May I know in what way, Devi?”

“Tell me, did any of your predictions come true? Have you ever told me that my
brother would die?”

“How can I, Devi, even if I know it for sure? If I had told that I would have been
branded as a Pandya conspirator. When the predictions concern families of
Kings I will have to be very vague and general. Even to say, “Dangerous times
are ahead” ”It won’t happen.” “A bad planet has influence in that event” will
lead to trouble. Again I don’t have the horoscope of Adithya Karikalan. I have
not seen it at all.”

“Even if you had seen it you would not have told anything. Even if you have told
we could not have prevented the calamity. Right?”

“How is it possible, Devi? I am an astrologer and not Lord Brahma, who is the
creator. Even Lord Brahma cannot change what he has already written on one’s
forehead.”

“Then what’s the use of astrology?”

“What a question, Devi? If people like you don’t consult astrology then how can
people like me live? How will the feet of Princesses touch the floor of my
humble hut?”

Kunthavai laughed. Even the morose face of Vanathi blossomed into a smile.

“Will you tell the same answer to all your customers?” – Kunthavai asked him.

“How can I Devi? People praise you as the incarnation of the Goddess of wealth
and the Goddess of Learning. How can I hope to win an argument with you,
Devi? I’d rather surrender than continue my arguments which is what I did just
now.

“But Devi, how can you assess the strength of astrology based on what I did not
examine or predict? You assessment should be based on what I studied and
predicted. Didn’t I tell you about the lucky stars of Ponniyin Selvan? There were
some setbacks in the middle. But in the end he is going to become the Emperor. I
heard that the date for his coronation has already been set.”

“I have not come here to discuss the date for his coronation.”

“Why should you, Devi? There are a lot of priests attached to the Palace. Even
Chief Minister is well versed in astrology.”

“Yes, the date has been set. It’s the seventh day in the month of Thai. Is it an
auspicious day?”

“It is very auspicious, Devi. They have done a great job in fixing the best day
available in the recent future.”

“The day may be good; but tell me whether his coronation will happen on that
day.”

“What a question, Devi! Why should it not happen?”

“The most auspicious day was set for the coronation of Lord Rama. But it did
not happen on that day.”

“Devi, Rama’s glory rose to a million times more than an ordinary king who has
an ordinary coronation. That gave birth to the great epic Ramayana. Let’s discuss
epics later. Why do you have this doubt, Devi? It appears that you don’t like the
coronation to happen on that day.”

“Your guess is right.”

“The whole world thinks that nobody can be happier than you in Ponniyin
Selvan ascending the Chozha Throne.”

“In normal circumstances, yes, I should be happy. But the obstinacy of this
Kodumbalur Princess has spoiled my happiness. Do you remember the terrible
vow she took in your house in Kudanthai?”

“Vow? So many things happened on that day. I don’t exactly remember the vow
taken by this Princess.”

“That boat-girl Poonkuzhali was jealous of her. She said something to infuriate
this girl. This girl took a terrible vow that she won’t sit on any throne till she
lived. Is it possible to sit on a throne after one is dead, astrologer?”

“Impossible, Devi.”

“I think even Mother Cauvery was furious over her terrible vow. She breached
the banks, flooded the place and even tried to take her away.”

“Oh yes, now I remember. I thought the girl was kidding.”

“Her words have become the harsh reality now. She won’t sit on the throne. She
wants my brother to marry somebody else who can sit with him on the Chozha
Throne. She wants to be one of the maids in the Palace and serve the Emperor. I
can’t even bear to hear it, Astrologer. Do you remember your predictions about
this girl?”

Astrologer’s face blossomed.

“Why not, Devi? I remember every word I spoke about this Princess. Along with
many precious books on astrology I had a collection of horoscopes of many
kings, queens, princes and princesses belonging to various countries. They have
all been washed away in floods. Mother Cauvery has taken them all with her.
But the horoscope of this Princess is still fresh in my mind. The lines on her
hand are still there in my eyes. Devi, I don’t care about my other predictions.
Whatever I predicted about this girl will become true.”

“Do you remember your predictions about her?”

“I do, Devi. I remember every word I spoke. The blessed man who will marry
this woman will be marrying the goddess of wealth and the goddess of earth at
the same time. In order to have the privilege of seeing this woman, empresses
from all over the world will wait in queue. The son who is to be born of her
blessed womb will hoist the flag of success all over the world. Wherever he goes
and whatever he sees, there will be nothing but success and prosperity.”

“I am more worried when you talk like this.”

The astrologer sat up.

“Worry? What for, Devi? The worrying time for Chozha clan is gone, Devi. Do
you know that today is a special day, Devi?”

“I do. Today is Margazhi Thiruvaathirai. A special day for Lord Shiva.”

“This is a good day for the Chozha clan. A good day for our divine Tamilnadu.
In the years to follow, in a year, not far from now, on the same day, that is
Margazhi Thiruvaathirai - when the star Thiruvaathirai occurs in the month of
Margazhi – a miracle is going to happen. A child is going to be born. The child
may not have the usual accompaniments of Lord Vishnu – I mean the conch and
the disc. But it will nevertheless be an incarnation of the Lord. Through the child
our Chozha Empire will attain the greatest heights of glory. How many miracles
are going to happen in this country! I may not live to see them. But you will live

long to see them all.”

The Astrologer spoke as if he were possessed.

They were startled by a sound. The caged parrot was fluttering its wings. A cat
was trying to spring on the hapless bird. Vanathi threw a bundle of palm leaves
on the cat.

She then spoke for the first time.

“Akka, I am convinced that the science of astrology is after all useful. I could
save that beautiful parrot that speaks well only by throwing the astrology scripts
on the cat. But for these astrology scripts the cat could have mauled the parrot.”

Chapter 82: The Chinese Merchants

From time immemorial people in many countries had tried to have a peep into
future. Not only the poor and the illiterate, but also the mighty Kings and learned
people have tried to know the future. Astrologers, soothsayers, palmists and
those who were engaged in the business of predicting the future multiplied in
highly developed and prosperous societies. There were also people who doubted
the very basis of the art of prediction and condemned astrology and its allied
arts.

Many were in the horns of dilemma – whether one should believe in astrology or
not. The conflict in their minds was eternal. Kunthavai, who was revered as the
most intelligent woman in the Kingdom, had such a conflict in her mind. But
when she was worried about her dear Chozha Kingdom, she kept aside her
personal views and ran to the astrologer.

In normal circumstances Kunthavai must have been as peaceful as her father
Emperor Sundara Chozhan. So many unexpected things had happened in the
recent past; but they all had a happy ending. Prince Arulmozhivarman was going
to be crowned. Kunthavai’s love for her younger brother was well known. She
strongly believed that the Chozha Empire was going to attain days of glory
under the rule of her brother, Arulmozhivarman, who had the sure signs of conch
and the disc on his hand.

As a child Arulmozhi had fallen headlong into the river. But he was saved at the
nick of time by a goddess. The incident earned him the epithet Ponniyin Selvan.
Other similar events that happened in his life reinforced Kunthavai’s faith that
her brother was born to rule the world. And now the time has come. All her
hopes about her younger brother were going to become true in a few days. But
Princess Kunthavai was not peaceful.

The future of Kodumbalur Princess Vanathi was discussed as much as that of
Prince Arulmozhivarman. Everyone talked about her future. Did they really
examine her horoscope, study her stars and made predictions? Or did they blurt
out something to please, Princess Kunthavai? Nobody knew. When many people
tell the same thing it might become true. Some are inherently clairvoyant.
Whatever they say invariably came true.

Kudanthai Astrologer who had migrated to the town of Thiruvaiyaaru
remembered that the star of the day was Thiruvaathirai and it was the Tamil
month of Margazhi. He emphasized the fact that the day was going to bring
glory to the Chozha clan.

Two years later on the same Margazhi Thiruvaathirai day a male child was born
in the Chozha clan. When the child grew up as a strong young man, he became
an Emperor, whose stature could be compared only to that of Chandragupta,
Asoka, Vikramadithya and Harsha. He was named Rajendra Chozhan at the time
of his coronation. He expanded the Empire from River Ganges in the north to
Srilanka in the south; from Lakshadweep to Srivijeyam islands.

The Astrologers words became true in a miraculous way. ‘

But on that day Princess Kunthavai did not believe his words. Vanathi was
infuriated by the “ blind prediction”. Soon she found an outlet for her anger; she
threw the astrology scripts on the cat that was about to harm the parrot and
declared in a mocking voice, ‘After all astrology is useful. The script has saved a
parrot’s feathers from a cat.’

The Astrologer knew what happened. After all he had the gift of the gab.

“Princess, they say for the wise and the strong even a blade of grass could be as
a powerful weapon as a sword. Because these scripts were blessed by the touch
of your hand they could save a life. In future your hand is going to save the lives
of many.”

Vanathi did not fall for his words.

“Akka, this man is adept in the art of flattery. Come let’s go.”

Astrologer was not upset.

“Devi, today you don’t like my words. But one day when my words come true,
please do remember this poor astrologer.”

Kunthavai added:

“This girl of course likes your words. She loves them. But she hates herself for
taking that foolish vow. She showed that hatred on your astrology scripts. Please
don’t mind.”

“The fury of the righteous will always be benevolent. The fury of this Princess
has saved my dear parrot.”

Kunthavai held discussions with the Astrologer for some time. She particularly
asked about the time of her brother’s marriage. There was enough reason for her
to be concerned.

Because on the previous day Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari, the Kodumbalur Chieftain
had asked her: “Devi, I am returning to Kodumbalur tomorrow. Can I take my
brother’s daughter, Vanathi, with me?”

Kunthavai was shocked.

“Mama, why are you in a hurry to go? Aren’t you there for the coronation?”

“Devi, I will come well in time for the coronation. Why should I wait here till
that time? I came here with a huge army ready to fight. By God’s grace a bloody
civil war has been averted. Whatever I wanted is going to happen. Ponniyin
Selvan has consented to be the King. All the chieftains have accepted him. Why
should I retain this large army here in the capital? It is a strain on the resources
of the local authorities. Let me take back the army, send them off to their
respective stations and come back in time for the coronation.”

“That is all right, Mama. But why should you take my friend Vanathi with you
now?”

“There is a reason for that, Devi. Yesterday we had a meeting amongst us the
chieftains. The deliberations went for a long time and finally we have decided
something. Your great grand father, Emperor Paranthaka, married six women.
He had married women from my clan, from Miladudaiyar’s clan and also from
the families of Pazhuvettaraiyars, Mazhavaraiyars and Sambuvaraiyars.

“So there was no feud between the chieftains during his days. Your grandfather
Arinchaya Chozhan married women from various clans of chieftains. He married
your grand mother who hailed from the Vaithumbaraya clan whom he defeated
in a war. But your father did not follow this good practice. He married only one
woman – your mother from the Malaiyaman clan. That led to jealousy, anger and
conflicts amongst the chieftains. So we have decided that whosoever is crowned
as the Chozha Emperor should marry from all the clans of Chieftains like your
great grand father and grand father. That was a unanimous decision, Devi. After
the coronation ceremony is over we want to discuss this with Ponniyin Selvan.
Now you can guess why I want to take back Vanathi to my place. If I leave her
here other chieftains might suspect that I am trying to act against the collective
decision of the chieftains.”

Kunthavai tried hard to suppress her fury.

“General, you asked me once to play the roles of a father and mother to Vanathi,
who had lost her parents. Have you forgotten that? I can’t send her to
Kodumbalur. I can’t be away from her even for a second. If you don’t want
Vanathi to be here in Thanjavur I will take her to Pazhaiyaarai with me. We
won’t even attend the coronation ceremony. Let’s not discuss her marriage now.
You may communicate the decision of the chieftains to Ponniyin Selvan after the
coronation. Let’s see what happens.”

Kodumbalur Chieftain accepted her suggestion.

Now that became an additional reason which made her seek the help of
astrologer.

Vanathi’s mind drifted to an event that happened several months ago. A bird and
a cat were the main characters in that event too. There was an elephant and a
mahout too in that event.

A wild cat tried to attack a bird’s nest hanging from a tree and eat the nestlings.
The mother bird flew around the nest trying to save her young ones. Vanathi
screamed for help. A young man bathing in the river came running. He studied
the situation and went back to bring his elephant. He saved the birds’ nest and
the nestlings from the mouth of the wild cat.

Vanathi thought that the young man was a mahout. Only later did she know that
he was Prince Arulmozhivarman. If only he had been a mere mahout! If only he
had been an ordinary soldier without any rank or fortune! It was because he
happened to be the son of Emperor Sundara Chozhan, that she is subjected to
this kind of torture. It was because of his position that the other friends of
Kunthavai and women like Poonkuzhali accused her of being greedy for the
throne.

While Vanathi was reminiscing the past and Kunthavai discussing the future
with the astrologer, they heard a sound at the door.

“Chinese silks for sale.” Several voices were heard.

Kunthavai and Vanathi realised that they had stayed there for a long time. They
stood up to go.

The Astrologer’s disciple came running in:

“Master, two Chinese merchants have come. They want to consult you. Can I ask
them to come tomorrow?”

Kunthavai spoke for the astrologer.

“No need. Let them come now. We are leaving.”

She held Vanathi’s hand and led her out of the house.

When the Princesses reached the entrance they saw an elephant loaded with
cloth bags. Two Chinese merchants were on the elephant. The merchants were
enquiring the mahout who was standing down.

The Princesses ignored them. They started walking towards the Chozha Palace
of Thiruvaiyaaru with the escort-soldier in tow.

Chapter 83: What Saint Thirunavukkarasar Saw!

The presiding deity of Thiruvaiyaaru, Lord Aiyaarappar and His divine consort,
Goddess Aram Valartha Nayaki were taken on a procession as part of the
Thiruvaathirai Festival. The vehicle of the Lord and the Goddess was silver
plated to remind the people of Lord Shiva’s abode in Himalayas which would
always be covered with silvery snow.

The procession was led by elephants, camels and large bulls. Drums and other
percussion instruments were mounted on these animals. The sound coming from
these instruments echoed in all the directions. They were followed by people
bearing the divine standards. Musicians playing a variety of instruments came
next. Dancers were also a part of the procession. Whenever the procession
stopped they showed their skills. The images of Nandi Deva, Chandikeswaran,
Lord Ganesh and Lord Subramanya were carried in their respective vehicles.
Finally came the Lord and His consort in a vehicle which resembled Kailas, the
abode of Lord Shiva.

Behind the images of the gods walked a group of people singing songs chosen
from the divine composition of Devaram. They had chosen those songs which
Saint Thirugnanasambandar and Saint Sundarar had composed the Lord and the
Goddess residing in that town. Thousands of people were in the procession.
Some of them were attracted by the elephants and camels; some listened to the
instrumental music; yet others were seduced by the beautiful dancers and some
became ecstatic on seeing the images of the Lord and the Goddess.

Hundreds of torches illuminated the procession adding a dream-like dimension
to the scenery. Kunthavai, Vanathi and Poonkuzhali saw the procession from a
vantage point at the terrace of the Chozha Palace. They saw every part of the
procession from the elephants which carried the drums to the people singing

Devaram songs. They saw the ecstatic devotees and the ordinary people who
were distracted by the variety show. They also worshipped the images of gods –
from Nandi Deva to presiding deity, Shiva and His divine consort Parvathi.

They also saw two Chinese Merchants riding an elephant. The riders got down
from the beast quite often and were lost in the crowd for some time. Then they
suddenly emerged from nowhere and climbed the elephant to continue their ride.

‘Are these people really merchants? Or spies who have come from China?’
Kunthavai had her doubts.

It was quite possible that the conflicts and confusion surrounding the choice of
the next Chozha King would have spread all around the world. Some enemy
kings might have sent their spies in the guise of the Chinese Merchants to gather
sensitive information.

Kunthavai and Vanathi were talking about those Chinese merchants.
Poonkuzhali overheard their conversation. She said, “Devi, those Chinese
merchants approached me at the entrance of the temple and asked if I am
interested in buying Chinese silk from them. I asked them to come to the Chozha
Palace. I told them that Princesses were going to come from Thanjavur and they
might be interested in expensive silks. Perhaps they might come here. You can
clear your doubts at that time.”

Meanwhile the images of the presiding deity and His consort reached the gate of
the Palace. The procession stopped. Special prayers were offered on behalf of
the Chozha King’s family. Sembianmadevi and his son, Madhuranthakan, who
were part of the procession till then stopped at the palace gates and waited till
the procession went past. Then they entered the Palace. They learnt that the
Princesses were in the terrace and went there.

The talk went around the festival at the temple and the grand procession. Queen
Mother made a request to her son: “My child, Saint Thirunavukkarasar has
composed a set of song on what he saw in this town, Thiruvaiyaaru. Can you
sing them for me please? I am not happy with the way the group in the
procession rendered those songs.”

Poonkuzhali and the Princesses seconded the Queen Mother. Chendan
Amudhan, who was now Prince Madhuranthakan, started to sing in his
melodious voice.

Lord Shiva has Mother Ganges and the crescent moon on his head. A garland of
flowers adorns his head. He was with my Holy Mother. I sang on Him. How did I
come here without leaving any trail? Oh, I have reached the holy town of
Thiruvaiyaaru. My Lord’s devotees are carrying water and flowers for my Lord.
As they enter my Lord’s temple I am silently walking behind them. Sentient
beings in love are entering the sanctum sanctorum in pairs. What do I see here! I
see a majestic male elephant and its beloved, the beautiful female elephant
coming in. Oh it is my Lord and His Consort. I see something else too which is
beyond my understanding. Yes, I see my Lord’s holy feet.

Madhuranthakan was in a state of trance when he completed this song and sang
the ten lines that followed it.

The listeners too were in a state of trance. What the Saint saw in that town
hundreds of years ago they too saw on that Thiruvaathirai day.

Madhuranthakan completed the song. Silence prevailed for a while. Kunthavai
spoke to Queen Mother Sembianmadevi.

“Ma, you have told me the story behind these songs. Can you please tell the
story again, please. Let them also hear.” Queen Mother started to narrate the
story.

Saint Thirunavukkarasar had become very old and weak. He wanted to visit the
abode of Lord Shiva in Himalayas and offer his prayers. He travelled north for a
very long time. He could not walk any further. He collapsed. An elderly man
appeared from nowhere and spoke to the Saint: “Where are you headed? There
is no need to go north to visit the Lord’s abode. Go to the town of Thiruvaiyaaru
on the banks of Cauvery. That’s the Lord’s abode on earth.” The elderly man
vanished.

The Saint knew that the Lord spoke through him and he came back to
Thiruvaiyaaru. Even as he was approaching the town his heart was in a state of
bliss. He saw many devotees carrying flowers in a basket and the river water in
a small mug. They were singing praises of the Lord.

The Saint went after them. At that time a male and a female elephant were seen
on the streets of Thiruvaiyaaru. To the Saint drunk in love for the Lord and the
Holy Mother, the elephant-pair appeared as Shiva and Parvathi. Before he
reached the temple he saw many animals and birds in pairs. The cock and the
hen. The peacock and the pea-hen. The male and the female cuckoo birds. The
boar and its pair. The male and the female cranes. The parrot and its mate. The
bull and the cow. So to the Saint every pair of animal and bird appeared as the
Lord and the Holy Mother. He saw the whole world as the manifestation of the
Lord and the Holy Mother.

He realised that the world we see with our eyes is the Lord’s abode. There is no
separate Lord’s abode in the Himalayas or anywhere. As he was walking, unable
to bear his newfound wisdom, he saw the presiding deity of the town

Aiyaarappar and the Goddess Aram Valartha Nayaki coming on a vehicle
designed to look like the abode of the Lord at Kailas. Whatever he saw with his
human eyes and the eyes of his wisdom he rendered as immortal songs. Every
song ends with the same refrain: “I see something else too which is beyond my
understanding. Yes, I see my Lord’s holy feet

Everybody listened with rapt attention. Kodumbalur Princess raised a question.

“Ma, The Saint has composed songs on the love between pairs of animals and
birds. Why has he not sung about human love?”

Poonkuzhali was quick to answer.

“In the world of human beings there is no scope for selfless love. Every instance
of human love is loaded with a selfish hidden agenda. Therefore the Saint
carefully omitted human beings from the list.”

“That’s not right, my child. If the Saint had seen you and my son he would have
praised human love too.” Queen Mother’s voice was full of affection.

The other princesses enthusiastically nodded.

They heard some ruckus near the gates of the palace. A guard came running up.

“We have two Chinese Merchants at the gate. They insist on seeing the

Princesses.”

Kunthavai was surprised. And furious too.

“Who are those impertinent guys? Tell them that we are not interested in their
ware. Get rid of them.”

Poonkuzhali spoke gently: “Sorry, Devi. I had asked them to come.”

“Then let them come in.”

A few minutes later the two Chinese merchants came in with two large sacks.

Chapter 84: The Coronation Gift

The Chinese merchants wore large turbans on their heads. They had long beards
and large moustaches. In the faint light coming from the solitary oil lamp in the
terrace their faces were not clear. It was difficult to guess how old they were.

The doubts in the mind of Princess Kunthavai became stronger. She barked
orders to the guard who brought in those merchants: “This light is enough to see
the silks. Bring a large torch.”

“I am going down. I will send it for you.” Prince Madhuranthakan offered help.
Queen Mother went down with him.

Kunthavai spoke to the merchants: “I don’t know why you are in such a great
hurry. You could not have come tomorrow morning to show your ware. Why did
you choose the night?”

One of the merchants spoke at length.

“We seek your pardon, Honourable Princesses. It has been several days since we
came to Thanjavur. We tried our best to come to the Palace; but we could not.
That was why we came here. A ship is leaving Nagapattinam port the day after
tomorrow. We will have to be in that ship at any cost. There is barely enough
time, Princesses.”

His voice was strange intonation but he spoke Tamil like a native.

Kunthavai asked him: “Merchant from China, you speak Tamil very well.”

“I have been staying in Chozha Kingdom for some time. I learnt to speak Tamil.
You know something, Princess? I love Tamil and Tamilnadu.”

“Then why are you in a hurry to sail back to your country? You can stay till the
coronation.”

“The next ship to distant lands leaves Nagapattinam port the day after
tomorrow. If we miss the ship.. . honestly, we don’t know when the next ship is.
Ship-service is no longer regular, frequent or reliable as it used to be in the past.”

“What do you think is the reason for that?”

“Don’t you know, Devi? Sea voyage is no longer safe. There are many pirates on
the high seas. Fanatic Arab soldiers are roaming along the Eastern and Western
seas. They even wait near the ports and sea-shores. When they spot merchant
ships they spring on us, kill our men and loot our ware. They fight like fanatics,
Devi. So these days merchant ships do not sail alone. We go as a convoy of ten
or twenty ships. One such convoy is leaving Nagapattinam the day after
tomorrow. If we miss that convoy God alone knows how long we may have to
wait for the next. Have mercy on us Princesses and see the ware we have
brought for you.”

The merchant started to unpack his sack. The other one also did the same.
Kunthavai stopped them.

“Merchants, there is no point in spreading your ware now. I can’t assess the
quality of your silks in darkness. We don’t have the money to pay for our
purchases.”

The merchant who spoke first appeared startled. He stood up and folded his
hands towards Kunthavai: “Princess, do you think we are mean enough to
demand money from the Princesses of the Chozha clan? What words, Princess!
If only you condescend to use these silks we will consider ourselves blessed. We
have not brought the silks for sale. We have brought them as coronation gifts.”

“Then you have come to the wrong place. None of us here are going to be
crowned. The only person who is going to be crowned is Prince
Arulmozhivarman. You will have to give your gifts only to him.”

“No, Devi. We have come to the right place. People say that if you want to get
favours from Ponniyin Selvan then you should first please Princess Kunthavai.
They say that is the surest way of winning favours from the Prince.”

The women laughed.

“Who told you? Where and when did you hear people say that?”

“You don’t believe us, Devi? We heard from the crowd that has gathered for the

festival here in this town. Everybody is saying that the Prince will never go
against the words of his elder sister. You can ask my friend here.”

The other merchant who was silent till now opened his mouth.

“That’s true, Princesses. If it is Ponniyin Selvan’s coronation then it is Princess
Kunthavai’s coronation as well. That’s what the people say. People also say that
from now on there will be only a woman’s rule in Chozha Kingdom. And it will
be good for everyone.”

The women laughed again.

“Therefore Princess, be gracious enough to accept these coronation gifts from
us,” said one merchant.

“And we want to submit our petition to Ponniyin Selvan through you, Princess,”
said the other.

“What petition? What do you want from Ponniyin Selvan? Unless I know that I
can’t accept this gift from you.” – Kunthavai.

“Devi, we want many things from him. Not only for us, Devi, but for all the
merchants in all the countries from Chozha Kingdom down to China, he is our
only hope. During the times of Emperor Paranthaka the seas were safe. The only
danger during a sea voyage was the storm. Pirates were almost unknown. The
Chozha ships used to navigate the seas as if they were passing through the Royal

High Road in the capital city. Chozha ships went through the countries of
Lemuria, Srivijayam, Kadaram, Kambojam (Cambodia), sold and bought
merchandise and finally touched China. Similarly our Chinese ships came freely
to Chozha Kingdom. That has become a dream these days. Devi, we want to
make an honest confession. If we carry back this merchandise there is no
guarantee that it will reach our place. Instead of letting these silks stolen by the
cruel Arabian pirates on the way, we can as well gift them to the Chozha
Princesses.”

Kunthavai’s large, beautiful eyes, which resembled large beetles, became even
larger in surprise.

“Do you think Ponniyin Selvan can do that? Do you think that the seas would
become safe in his reign as they were in the times of Emperor Paranthaka? Do
you have hopes that sea voyages will come safe as they were in an earlier era?
Do you think Ponniyin Selvan’s fame will spread as far as Srivijeyam and
Kambojam?”

“Not only us, Devi, the Chozha merchants too believe in Ponniyin Selvan. Why
go that far, Devi? We consulted an astrologer a little while ago who also
endorsed our views.”

“What did the astrologer say?”

“Ponniyin Selvan will mobilise a huge navy and go beyond the seas. He will
destroy the pirates on all the major sea routes and make sea-voyage fearless as it
was in an earlier period. The Chozha Kingdom will recapture the glory which it
had during the days of Emperor Paranthaka. These are the exact words of the
astrologer, Devi. But he was concerned about... . “

“What?”

“The Chozha Princesses should not stand in his way. They should let him do his
duty.”

“Did he say only that? Did he further slander the innocent Chozha Princesses?”

“Slander! Oh My God! That is too strong a word, Devi. There is no one in the
Chozha Kingdom who slanders the Pazhaiyaarai Princess and the Kodumbalur
Princess, Devi. How can the poor astrologer who depends on the mercy of these
Princesses slander them, Devi?”

“What else did the astrologer say about us?”

“He told us that the Princesses paid a visit to him before we went there. He
predicted that both the Princesses will get married soon. So if you cannot accept
these silks as coronation gifts, please accept them as wedding gifts.”

Vanathi was furious. “Akka, these merchants talk too much. Send them away.”

“Please be patient, Vanathi. Let us see to what extent they can go.”

She then turned to the merchants.

“Weren’t you the ones who came to the astrologer’s place riding an elephant?”

“Yes, Devi. We sought the help of the astrologer for something and it has
happened already. We learnt that you were there. The Astrologer rightly
predicted that we will be blessed with a chance to see you. That has become true.
If his predictions about Princess Vanathi become true then all our worries will be
gone.”

Vanathi shouted: “AKKA, SEND THEM AWAY.”

Kunthavai was unfazed.

“Merchants, weren’t you the ones who mingled with the festival crowd some
time ago?”

“Yes, Devi. We wanted to know what the people thought of the upcoming
coronation,”

“What do the people think? I am sure they will be happy with Ponniyin Selvan
being crowned.”

“Nobody talked about the coronation, Devi.”

“Then?”

“They are mesmerized by Madhuranthakan’s devotion to the Lord, Devi.”

“Poonkuzhali, did you hear them? We will be happy if you bring us good tidings
like that. Tell me, what else did they talk about Madhuranthakan?”

“They praised his sacrifice. Even though he had the full right to the throne he has
given it up in favour of his nephew, Ponniyin Selvan. They were all praise for
him, Devi.”

“Oh, is it so? What do they think is the reason for that?”

“Madhuranthakan fell in love with a boat-girl and insisted that she should be
made the Empress when he is crowned. That changed the minds of the
Chieftains who were on his side. “If he wants the boat-girl on the throne by his
side, then let us not make him sit on the throne. We shall crown Ponniyin Selvan
instead of him.” People go on praising Madhuranthakan for giving up the throne
for the sake of his love. Princesses, if that fortunate boat-girl is here we wish to
gift some silks to her too.”

Poonkuzhali was offended.

“Devi, I endorse the words of the Kodumbalur Princess. These merchants talk
too much. Send them away.”

“Patience , Poonkuzhali, patience. Why are you offended? They did not talk ill
of you. They are only praising you.” – Kunthavai.

“I don’t want them to praise me or blame me. I don’t want any gift from them. I
am going.”

“Oh My God! So you are the lucky one! What the people said about you is
right.”

“What did they say?” Now there was a smile on Poonkuzhali’s face.

“One person in the crowd said that Madhuranthakan sacrificed the great Chozha
Empire for her love. Another retorted: “He just sacrificed one Empire for
Poonkuzhali Devi? If I had nine empires, each as large and as glorious as this
Chozha Empire I will sacrifice all the nine for her sake.” I fully agree with him,
Devi.”

Poonkuzhali pretended to be angry.

“Akka, we should do something to punish this merchant who has a big mouth. If
not, I will ask Ponniyin Selvan to punish this impudent fellow.”

Prince Madhuranthakan had finished his worship and came there with the
flowers. He had overheard the words of the Chinese Merchant and Poonkuzhali’s
response.

He spoke softly:

“There is nothing wrong in what he said. Why should we punish him? I too
endorse his words, Poonkuzhali.”

The Chinese merchant turned to look at Prince Madhuranthakan. Poonkuzhali
spoke to him.

“If he is really a Chinese Merchant there is nothing wrong in what he said. But
this man is an imposter. Want to see?”

In a quick motion she pulled the merchant’s head gear. It fell down. And along
with it the false beard also fell down.

It was Vandhiya Thevan.

“Your Highness should save me.” Vandhiya Thevan hugged the other merchant.
His turban and his beard also fell down. It was Ponniyin Selvan with his usual
bewitching smile.

The three women had a hearty laugh. Sembianmadevi came to the terrace. They
narrated the story to her and laughed again.

“Ma, when I saw them near the temple I had my doubts. That’s why I boldly
invited them to the Palace.”

Prince Madhuranthakan smiled. “I recognised my friend. That’s the reason I left
the women here and went for my pooja.”

Kunthavai told Vanathi: “At last Vanathi, only you and I were made fools.”

“Why should they come in disguise and fool us, Akka? Ask them.” – Vanathi.

“No need to ask, Vanathi. I know my brother. He is innocent. He never comes in
disguise. He never tells lies. I think he is now spoilt because of bad company.”

“Devi, please don’t blame Vandhiya Thevan. This was purely my idea.”

“I said you are spoilt by bad company precisely because you have such ideas. Ok
let it go. But don’t do this again.”

“Akka, our Tamil Saint Thiruvalluvar has said a lot about truthfulness. But he
has also said, “Even a lie is truthful if it does unsullied good.”

“When Thiruvalluvar composed that he would not have dreamt that you will be
putting that to use in this way.”

“Ok Akka, let us leave out Thiruvalluvar. What about Lord Rama? When he left
for forest the people of Ayodhya followed him. Didn’t he adopt the strategy of

falsehood to make the people go back to the city? When the people were
sleeping he asked his charioteer to drive towards the city. After some time he
asked him to turn around and drove towards River Ganges.”

“Thambi, I will be happy if you follow Lord Rama in all the aspects. That’s all
right. What “unsullied good” did your impersonation achieve?”

“We could mingle with people and know what’s in their minds.”

“What did you know, Thambi?”

“Many things, Akka. The most important of them all is that people want the
Chozha Empire to attain the glory of Emperor Paranthaka days. We came in
disguise, all right. But whatever we said is true. We met you both on the road
and then went to Thanjavur. There at the entrance of the Fort we met two real
Chinese merchants. We bought these silks from them. Whatever we said about
the sea-pirates to you is what we heard from them. My friend and I have actually
suffered the cruelty of Arabian pirates.

“Soon after the coronation I and my friend are leaving for Srilanka. From there
we have planned to go to countries that lie beyond the high seas. We are not sure
whether we will come back alive or lose our lives in the service of our great
country. So, Devi, we have a prayer. Till we leave the country we want all of you
to stay with us and then bless us before we embark on the great voyage. We
followed you only to make this request, Akka.”

Kunthavai’s eyes were filled with tears. Poonkuzhali spoke in a choked voice.

“I don’t know why men invented war. If only people love each other and live
happily on this planet.. .. “

“Impossible, my child. So long as the word exists there will be war. We read in
scriptures that even our Lord Shiva and Goddess Parameswari had to fight holy
wars. Some are born in this world to establish righteousness. For them fighting a
war is a way of life.”

They were surprised by these words coming from the Queen Mother.

Chapter 85: The Inner Meaning Of The Sculpture

Chendan Amudhan, now Prince Madhuranthakan, responded to the words of his
mother:

“Amma, there are many in this world who are war-hungry. They consider the
days on which there is no war as wasted days. My friend Vandhiya Thevan and
Ponniyin Selvan belong to that club. But aren’t you divine, Amma? You think
the days on which you have not praised the Lord or think about him are wasted
days. I am surprised that you also support war.”

“My dear son, I don’t mind if anybody demeans war and valour. But you and
Poonkuzhali should never do that. You are alive today only because the King of
Vallam, your friend, Vandhiya Thevan is adept in war. But for that he could not
have saved your life. Because he saved your life on that fateful day you are able
to sing praises of the Lord and make our hearts melt in love.”

“Queen Mother, yes, I saved your dear son’s life. But I can never forget how
your son and his wife, Poonkuzhali, saved mine. It is because of Poonkuzhali’s
war-skills that I am alive today.”

“We are all saved by Lord Shiva and his consort, Goddess Parameswari. But for
their grace we could not have saved each other.”

“My dear son, even our Lord, who is nothing but love, had to go to war several
times. Our Holy Mother, the embodiment of love and bliss, had to don the role of
Durga Parameswari and fight evil. Our Holy Mother has taken the form of

peace-loving Aram Valartha Nayagi in the temple in this town. But she also
appears as Mahishasuramardhini, the Devi who killed the Mahisha, the demon
with the head of a buffalo. Haven’t you seen her?”

“Yes, Mother. I saw that form. I was wondering why our Holy Mother who
created the whole universe and takes care of it as a loving mother, should stand
on the head of a buffalo!”

“Yes, we see our Holy Mother in this temple after she destroyed evil in the form
of Demon Mahisha. That is why we see nothing but love, peace and grace on
Her face. In the cave-sculptures of Mamallapuram we can see our Holy Mother
fighting with the demon. There she appears terrifying as Rana Bhadra Kali, full
of fury, intent on destroying evil. Some might think why the Almighty Goddess
should fight with after all a buffalo and why should there be so much fanfare
about that fight. There is an inner meaning to that statue. It requires a lot of
sincerity and maturity to understand the meaning.”

Prince Arulmozhivarman addressed the Queen Mother with utmost reverence.

“Devi, I don’t know whether we are mature enough to know the inner meaning;
but we are sincere, Devi. We want to know. We have been listening to every
word that comes from your blessed mouth with rapt attention. Even our
Vandhiya Thevan, whose eyes are forever darting, is now looking only at you,
Ma.”

This led to smiles which the women tried to cover up. Vandhiya Thevan’s eyes
wandered frequently to the beautiful face of Princess Kunthavai. Ponniyin
Selvan was alluding to that. The women understood and smiled. Kunthavai
blushed.

Queen Mother responded to Ponniyin Selvan’s request.

“If you promise to be sincere and attentive I’ll share that with you. Our
scriptures describe the wars between gods and demons. They talk about Lord
Vishnu being born in this world several times to fight evil. If everything is God’s
creation then why did He create evil? Why did he create the demons? We cannot
answer this question with the limited intelligence we have. We can only say that
its God’s game. It’s His leela, which means sport. But one thing is sure. There is
a constant war going on between the good and the evil. At times evil seems to
have an upper hand. At times it appears that evil is going to rule over the world.
And evil did rule. Demons like Surapadman, Hiranyan and Ravana ruled over
the world for thousands of years before they were killed by God. And their end
came in a second.”

“You are right, Ma. The Demon Ravana won over the gods and made them to
serve him. In the end two men and a few monkeys destroyed him and his entire
clan.” - Madhuranthakan.

“So we should not lose heart when evil gains upper hand. We should bet on the
forces of good. We should believe in the ultimate success of good and fight our
holy war. For those who fight with that attitude success is assured.”

“Ma, you were about to tell us about Demon Mahisha.” - Poonkuzhali

“Thank God you reminded me, my child. There are two types of demoniac
forces. One is gross and the other is subtle. One is foolish and the other is very
intelligent. Demon Mahisha symbolises the gross, foolish demoniac force.
Haven’t you seen a buffalo running amok? At that time the buffalo will be more

powerful than even an elephant. It will kill all animals and human beings on its
way. That is the power of the gross demoniac force. At times such a demoniac
force ascends the throne and rules the world. Our ancestors described that as the
rule of Demon Mahisha. When Mahisha occupied the throne in the celestial
world, chaos and pandemonium prevailed in all the three worlds. Demon
Mahisha banned books, music, art, sculptures, paintings, temples and towers.
They were all destroyed. Anything connected to intelligence or art form was
destroyed. The Rishis, the seers and the gods trembled. Many of them feared
death and accepted Mahisha’s rule. This fuelled his arrogance and anger. His
cruelty increased. If foolishness joins hands with arrogance and cruelty the
results will be disastrous. Unable to bear his cruelty people in all the three
worlds screamed. Even the demons could not withstand his rule. They too
joined in the scream for help. Holy Mother opened Her eyes. She took the form
of the terrible Maha Kali and killed the demon Mahisha. When the divine force
vanquished the gross demoniac force the three worlds got liberated from the
bondage of the demoniac forces. Rishis, gods, human beings and even the other
demons let out a sigh of relief and started singing praises of the Holy Mother.

My dear children, even now those gross demoniac forces exist in this world. I
hear that beyond the North-western borders of this blessed Bharath Varsh, gross
demoniac forces have appeared. They fight cruelly, plundering the cities and
killing innocent people. They loot the temples and break the statues of God. I
also hear that there are no strong emperors in the North to block those gross
forces. Let those forces not come near our blessed Tamilnadu. And if they do,
you, who have been born in a clan of valiant people, should be ready to fight and
vanquish those demoniac forces.”

“ We will be ever-ready, Queen Mother. Please tell us about the other type of
demoniac forces.”

“They are very intelligent people. But they use their intelligence in wrong and
sinful ways. They will do penance for years and get boons from God. But they
will use it only for destructive purposes. What did the demons known as

Tripuras do? They were three, each of whom created a world of his own. They
took the form of mountains and flew in the air, landed on the cities and destroyed
them. The demon Soorapadman had a rare boon. If you cut his head it will grow
again. Any number of times. Demons like Ravana and Indrajith had the boon of
hiding themselves in the clouds and sending divine weapons on the people
standing on earth. These cunning demons have been symbolised as the demon
Muyalakan. When our Lord dances as Nataraja, he has a careful eye on the
demon Muyalakan pressed under his feet. If the Lord is even slightly careless
Muyalakan will escape from the Lord’s feet and wreak havoc in the Universe.
Muyalakan reminds us that from the very beginning of Creation good forces
have been fighting against evil forces. So my dear children, how can we say that
we do not want war at all?”

“Ma, you made us understand good and evil, war and peace in the right
perspective. What are your orders for us, Ma?”

“My dear children, I can only request you to fight on the side of good. I don’t
have powers to issue orders to you. Only your soul, your conscience can give
orders to you. Obey those orders. A little while ago you said that the seas near
Tamilnadu coast are infested with pirates. And that has led to the merchants
losing heavily. To destroy those pirates and to save our merchants from losses is
your duty as you are born in the ruling class. If you let the pirates have their way
then soon they will infiltrate into our borders and disturb our peace and stability.
My late lamented husband who is at present living in the Lord’s Abode, if he
were alive today, would have told you the same thing.”

“Now that we know what’s there in your heart, we will honour your wishes,
Ma.”

“If you promise to honour my wishes I want to tell something else.”

“Devi, I don’t remember to have acted against your wishes ever. If I had done so,
please forgive me.”

"My dear child, what you did in the past does not matter. What you are going to
do is very, very important. Till now you were just a favourite child living in the
Palace. So we danced to your tunes. You too honoured our wishes. From now on
you will be the King, the ruler of this vast country. After your coronation we will
have to obey your wishes, my child.”

“Ma, your words hurt me. I will forever remain your favourite child. I will
always honour your wishes.”

“Then listen to me. This Chozha Clan should be preserved for all time to come.
Persons born in the Royal Family should be ready to face death anytime. But
they should also do everything to preserve their clan. Your brother Karikalan
died without getting married. So as of now you are the only one left in the
Chozha clan. So before you board the ship to cross the high seas you should
make arrangements to preserve our clan. You should have your wedding
celebration along with your coronation. You should have done penance in the
past to get a girl like Vanathi as your wife. The mangal sutra you are going to tie
on this girl’s neck will serve as armour and save you from all dangers.”

“I am ready to wear that armour, Devi. But Vanathi is against it. She keeps on
telling ‘I have vowed not to ascend any throne.’”

Poonkuzhali intervened.

“Let us not take the words of Kodumbalur Princess seriously. She wants us to

beg her to become the queen. If Ponniyin Selvan pleads with a little more
passion she will relent.”

She laughed. Everybody laughed. But Vanathi broke into sobs. She was crying.

“Silly girl, why are you crying now?” Kunthavai grabbed her hand and took her
down.

Chapter 86: Is It Dream Or Real?

Queen Mother, Prince Madhuranthakan and Poonkuzhali left for Thanjavur the
next morning.

Ponniyin Selvan and Vandhiya Thevan had planned to go to Uraiyur and
Srirengam, the next day. Ponniyin Selvan had promised to show the Grand
Anaicut built by his ancestor Karikal Valavan to Vandhiya Thevan.

Ponniyin Selvan had come to take leave of his sister Kunthavai.

“ Akka, should you go to Pazhaiyaarai?”

“Thambi, should you go to Uraiyur? Why don’t you come with us to
Pazhaiyaarai?”

“Sorry, Akka. I have promised to meet Azhwarkkadian at Uraiyur for an
important work. I cannot miss that appointment.”

“I have been watching you, Thambi. You are not like what you used to be. I am
afraid your mind is corrupted. You have started neglecting me. Many changes
have come over you. I am sure it is because of the bad influence of your friend,
the King of Vallam.”

“Please don’t blame him, Akka. Have I not grown up? In a few days I am going
to assume charge as the Emperor of a large kingdom. At least from now on let
me do what I want to do, Akka.”

“You do whatever you want to do, Thambi. I am not going to stand in your way.
But don’t show your Emperor’s authority on me. And don’t expect me to act
according your wishes.”

“Please do attend my coronation. Thereafter you can do whatever you want to
do.”

“You can order me around after your coronation. Because then you will be the
reigning Emperor. Till then you will be my little brother. You don’t have any
right over me.”

“So, you are not going to attend my coronation?”

“That depends on Vanathi. If she wants to go, then I will come with her.
Otherwise I won’t.”

“Where is Vanathi, Akka?”

“She has gone to worship your mother, Ponni, I mean River Cauvery. Her only
prayer to River Ponni is that you should be blessed with some intelligence at
least now.””

Ponniyin Selvan laughed.

“Let her prayers be granted. Can I go now, Akka?”

“Thambi, I have never seen anybody half as cruel as you. Vanathi did not have a
wink of sleep last night. She was crying. Please take leave of her before you go.”

“She did not sleep. And she did not let me sleep too. If she does not care to know
what’s in my mind then she has to remain sleepless and cry all night. Why do
you insist that I should marry this girl and suffer in my life?”

Ponniyin Selvan went to the back yard of the Palace.

He crossed the garden and reached the river bank. He saw Vanathi sitting there.
She had a plate full of flowers by her side. She was throwing one flower after the
other into the river. But for the movement of her hands she appeared like a statue
of a woman.

Ponniyin Selvan walked without making any noise and sat on the top step.
Vanathi must have known that somebody had come. Perhaps she had an intuition
that it was Ponniyin Selvan. She did not turn around. She stopped throwing
flowers and remained frozen in her place.

Ponniyin Selvan could see dew drops in the petals of some of the flowers in the
plate. The tear drops suspended from Vanathi’s eyes resembled those dew drops.

When the golden rays of the sun started mingling with the soft waves of the
Ponni River it appeared that the maiden – Chozha Empire – was draped in a blue
silk saree with golden zari lines running through. The borders of the saree must
have been lush green. The green meadows on the either side of the river
appeared as borders for the blue saree.

The flowing water created a melodious music which synchronised beautifully
with the songs of the birds in the meadows on the river banks. It was an ideal
location and the right time for a creative mind to take flights of imagination to
fantasy lands.

Prince Arulmozhivarman broke the heavy silence.

“Vanathi, were you day-dreaming? Have I disturbed your dreams?”

“Yes, Your Highness. I am day-dreaming. But how can you disturb my dream?
Even if I dream while sleeping at night I dream only of you. So when I see you
near me I always have this confusion – whether it is a dream or reality. Many
times I fail to welcome you. I may appear rude.

“I have had many kinds of day dreams on many days. When I first met you at the
palace garden at Thirunallam I thought you were a mahout. I have thought many
times thereafter that it would have been far better if you had really been a
mahout. One of my frequent dreams is that you are a mahout and you take me on
your elephant to distant fantasy lands. I have imagined you as the chief of gods,
Devendra and I, Indrani his queen.”

“You have changed it now?” The Prince interrupted.

“Please let me finish, Your Highness. First I fantasized us as Devendra and his
wife, Indrani; soon I changed my mind. The celestial couple can never be
peaceful. They will never have the time to ride on their prized procession, white
elephant, Iravatham. Every time they go they will have to go with all the regal
and celestial paraphernalia. I would then think that it would have been better if I
had been born as a boat-girl instead of a princess.”

“I understand, Poonkuzhali. You are jealous of Poonkuzhali.”

“I accept, Prince. Of all the women in the world I am jealous only of
Poonkuzhali Devi. Her dreams are going to come true very soon. She and her
beloved will soon leave for Kodikkarai. There they will have romantic boat
rides. They will also serve Lord Kuzhakar at the temple there. They are going to
lead blissful lives. It is no wonder she laughs at me. Your Majesty, you can
punish me in any way you want. But don’t make Poonkuzhali Devi laugh at my
life.”

Ponniyin Selvan remembered what happened the previous day.

“Please be patient, Vanathi. Poonkuzhali laughed at you yesterday, right? Soon a
time will come where you will laugh at her.”

“I don’t want to laugh at Poonkuzhali Devi. I don’t want to laugh at anybody.
Let everyone laugh at me. All I want in my life is to see a hint of smile on your
golden face, Your Highness. When you see others, when you talk to others, your
face is fully blossomed. But when you are with me I notice a frown on your eyebrows. Even now I am scared to look at you.”

“Listen, Vanathi. There is a reason for the frown when I see you. Others don’t
disturb me. But you do. Others don’t rob my peace. But you do. My sister told
me that you did not sleep yesterday. I also didn’t sleep, Vanathi. I haven’t had a
good sleep for the past several days. When I sit on the terrace and look at the
stars, they remind me of the glow in your eyes. When the trees in the garden
sway in the wind, and the leaves make a rustling sound, I hear only the sound of
your laugh. When my body feels the hug of a breeze I feel as if your touching
me with your fingers which resemble the glory-lily flowers and I lose myself in
ecstasy. You have been tormenting me, torturing me, Vanathi. So when I see you
I can’t help a frown. My eyebrows arch. I am afraid that you may not let me
achieve what I want to.”

“You don’t have to fear that, my Lord. I will never hinder your work.”

“No, you won’t hinder me; you can’t. For that matter, nobody can. Have you
seen the rain bearing clouds coming from the East? The clouds are loaded with
water. Lighting and thunder are packed inside those clouds. The stormy winds
push the clouds. Can anybody stop the clouds? I am like those clouds, Vanathi. I
am constantly excited. My mind is always busy thinking of something or the
other. There are invisible flashes of lightning deep inside my mind. Inaudible
thunders happen inside my mind. Storms, hurricanes and gales invite me. The
seven seas raise their waves like mountains to welcome me. I am pulled by the
sound coming from thousands of conches, drums and the trumpeting of warelephants. Nobody can stop me, Vanathi. But anybody can make an attempt and
make me restless.”

“I will never do that, my Lord. I won’t even try to stop you. I may not be
intelligent or skilled to assist somebody who is born to rule the world. But at
least I won’t be a nuisance to you, my Lord. That is the reason I refuse to sit by
your side on the Chozha throne.”

“Vanathi, the glory of the Chozha Throne is great; but it’s size is small. Only one
person can sit there. The Empress has to sit on another throne by the side of the
Emperor.”

“My Lord, I don’t want a place in the throne you sit. Nor do I want to sit in the
adjacent throne. Let that good fortune go to the blessed lady who is going to be
your Empress. If only you give me a small place on the throne of your heart, I
will consider it as the fruit of the penance I did in hundreds of my past lives. I
will be happy beyond words.”

“Vanathi, you have asked something which I can easily give. In fact I have
already given it to you. You are sitting on the throne of my heart. But tell me
this. Don’t you really want to become the Chozha Empress? Don’t you want y to
wear the Empress’ crown with its dazzling gems?”

“No, my Lord. I have seen the ancient crowns of Chozha Kingdom. I have felt
them with my hand. I am afraid if I place one of them on my head the weight
will crush me and make me gasp for breath. My body does not have that kind of
strength, nor my mind, that kind of courage. Those who have the strength and
courage to bear the ornamental crowns, let them wear them. I want a gift from
you before you go on your voyage on the high seas. I will make a garland of the
flowers gathered from the Palace garden. Please place the garland on my neck
and make me your eternal slave before you leave for your voyage. Flowers are
probably the only thing I can bear with ease, my Lord.”

“Do you know I have brought a necklace of priceless gems as my coronation gift
to you? I got it from those Chinese merchants.”

“Why should you give me a gift for your coronation?”

“Ok, let’s leave it. I’ll give it somebody else. Let us have a deal, Vanathi. Before
I leave the country I will garland you as you wish. But every time I come back
from the voyage you should be waiting for me with a different type of garland.
The flowers should be different every time. I will go to those far off countries
beyond the high seas, hoist our Tiger Flag there and return victoriously. You
should welcome me every time with a victory garland. Will you, Vanathi?”

“Not one, my Lord. I will make a hundred garlands and wait for you. Not only
me the whole country will be waiting for you, my Lord.”

Chapter 87: Poet Stunned!

As the day of Prince Arulmozhivarman’s coronation drew near the entire Chozha
Empire was caught in a frenzy of festivities. Ponniyin Selvan was the unanimous
choice of the people. There was virtually no one in the entire Kingdom who did
not want him to be the King. Men, women, children, people from the cities, rural
folk, traders, farmers – everybody welcomed the coronation of Ponniyin Selvan.
They praised his stars. They praised his unassuming approach and his capacity to
mingle with people. Ramayana vividly describes the joy of the people of
Ayodhya when Emperor Dasaratha announced the coronation of his son, Lord
Rama.

The great Tamil poet, praised as an Emperor amongst poets, Kambar, describes
the scene in the country soon after the date for coronation was set. He says that
the older women in the country were like Rama’s mother, Kausalya. They were
happy as if there own son was about to be crowned. Younger women were in the
position of Sita, Rama’s wife. Every woman of that age felt as if her own
husband was being made the king. The priests in Ayodhya thought of themselves
like the Rajaguru, Vasishta as if they were going to place the crown on the
Lord’s head. All the old men in the country of Ayodhya were as excited as
Dasaratha. It was as if their son was about to be made the King.

What did Lord Rama do earn the love and admiration of the people of Ayodhya?
He was a great warrior incomparably skilled in the art of archery. But that was
known much later. Yes, Lord Rama killed the demon Ravana and several other
demons and freed the world from the clutches of evil. But that would happen
much later. Yes, he had been to the forest with Sage Vishwamitra and killed the
demons and demonneses there, and helped the Sage to complete the ritual of
sacrifice. But that was not enough to explain the universal love of the people of
the entire country. For starters the people of Ayodhya did not even know that the
Lord Rama did that; for the sage did not talk about the heroic deeds of the Lord.
That was eclipsed by the celebration of Lord Rama’s marriage with Sita.

Some do great things in this world and steal the hearts of people. Some sing,
dance, compose poetry, paint, make sculptures and earn the praise of people. But
some others are simply born great. Without any specific reason they earn the
love and praise of all the people they come in contact with. That exactly is
charisma which is a gift Nature has conferred on them. The finest example of a
person in this class is Ponniyin Selvan. Was nature partial to people like him?
Probably, yes. But it was difficult to say anything at that time. Nature might have
done something to balance the unique gifts of charm and charisma as Mother
Nature was the best when it came to the fine art of balancing.

Lord Rama was adored, loved and even worshipped by the people of Ayodhya.
But Rama’s life was full of pain and suffering. He suffered like no other man in
his country. He was banished into the forest. His beautiful wife was abducted by
a demon. The agony he went through could not even be described. Perhaps that
was Nature’s way of balancing the gift of universal charm.

In a way Prince Arulmozhivarman was like Lord Rama. Nature had been very
partial to him. His mere appearance was enough to make the people he met to
fall in love with him. His soft manners, the way he spoke and other sweet
qualities in his characters endeared him to everyone. He was in the war-front at
Srilanka. He did not have any opportunity to showcase his valour. The enemy
King was in hiding. Thanks to the monsoons the army could do nothing. Even
then stories about his valour, mostly fictional, were doing rounds in the Chozha
Empire. If people love somebody they are ready to believe even the most
exaggerated stories about the person’s achievements.

Ever since Emperor Sundara Chozhan lost action in his legs and was bed-ridden
the people in the Empire were worried about the possible confusion and conflicts
involving the issue of succession. Rumours spread that the Pazhuvettaraiyars,
Sambuvaraiyar and a few other chieftains along with some high-ranking
government officials worked against the interest of the Emperor’s sons and that
they preferred Madhuranthakan to be the successor. Of course there was nothing

against Madhuranthakan, the false one living at the palace at that time. But
Madhuranthakan never moved with people. People knew that like his father he
hated worldly life and spent all his time in devotion to Lord Shiva.

The Chozha Empire had been expanding and growing steadily since the time of
Vijayaalaya Chozhan. Trade flourished and the standard of living improved. The
army conquered many nations and brought home the foils of war. People were
delighted. They wanted the Empire to expand and grow further. But if
Madhuranthakan, who was more a devotee than a King-material succeeded
Sundara Chozhan the expansion and growth and development of the Empire
would be a big question mark. There was another fear in the minds of people. If
Madhuranthakan came to power he would only be a proxy of the chieftains who
would be the real rulers.

Adithya Karikalan was one of the greatest warriors the country had seen in the
recent past. Yet people were not enthusiastic about his coming to power. He
never moved with people. He was not endowed with those sweet qualities which
endeared his little brother to the people. Added to that there were so many
rumours about Karikalan’s personal life. He had done something terribly wrong
and was being tormented by his conscience. Perhaps his father knew what it was
and hated him for that. So when he died people gave him a funeral that a great
warrior like him so richly deserved. But in the heart of hearts people were not
very sad. They blamed the comet, the stars and Karikalan’s destiny and consoled
themselves.

The death of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar, especially the way it happened, earned
respect and honour for him in the minds of people. People sort of knew that the
devil he married in his old age, Nandini, was part of the Pandya conspirators’
gang. The old man’s mind had been corrupted by that witch. Karikalan’s death
was caused by those conspirators. When Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar knew the truth
he took the entire blame on himself and killed himself. People had nothing but
sympathy for the valiant old man. Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s last words to the
other chieftains were: “Abandon the idea of crowning Madhuranthakan. Make

Ponniyin Selvan the next Emperor” .

When people came to know this they respected him more. The valiant old man
had removed all the obstacles to Ponniyin Selvan’s coronation before he died.
People were all praise for Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

Except the members of the Royal family and a few chieftains close to the family
nobody knew about the impersonation of Madhuranthakan. The old
Madhuranthakan, the false one, used to spend all his time inside the four walls of
the Palace. He never came out and moved with people. When there were talks
about his succession he was carried in a closed palanquin. People did not have
many opportunities to see him. So virtually nobody in the country knew that the
false Madhuranthakan was gone and the true one had come in his place.

People who saw the new Madhuranthakan, yes, Chendan Amudhan, at the recent
Thiruvaathirai Festival in Thiruvaiyaaru did not know that the change. His wife
Poonkuzhali attracted the attention of the people. Some of them said that she was
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s daughter. But others refuted. They said that she was a
boat-girl who belonged to the Kodikkarai village. And that Madhuranthakan had
married her only recently.

In those days it was quite usual for Kings and chieftains to marry many women.
So nobody was surprised to see Poonkuzhali as Madhuranthakan’s wife. People
had heard that Madhuranthakan refused the crown against the wishes of many
chieftains. They respected Madhuranthakan and even loved him. His saintly
appearance made him more respected. Another interesting rumour was doing
rounds. Prince Madhuranthakan declined the throne only because of his love for
the boat-girl Poonkuzhali. This made Prince Madhuranthakan sit firmly in the
hearts of people. They expected that he would be given a very high post by
Ponniyin Selvan.

With just two days to go for the grand event, the coronation of Ponniyin Selvan,
people started moving towards the capital city of Thanjavur from all the towns
of Chozha Empire. Outside the gates of the Fort there was a sea of people. The
doors of the Fort were opened. In view of the coronation all the entry and exit
controls were removed. People could walk in and out of the Fort any time. In
fact the date was set quite early to avoid more crowds.

Excellent arrangements were made for those who had come for the coronation
ceremony from near and far. It was event management at its best - for it was one
of the greatest events in the history of Tamilnadu – the crowning of Raja Raja
Chozhan.

General Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari had sent back a major portion of the army he
had brought with him on the advice of Ponniyin Selvan. He retained a thousand
soldiers just in case. The chieftains who were allies of Pazhuvettaraiyars who
had stationed their armies near Kudanthai had sent them back their respective
bases. The Fort was now secured by Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s men.

The soldiers of Pazhuvur, of Kodumbalur and the King’s body guards, the
Velakkara Army, forgot their previous enmity and were in a festive mood. They
hugged each other, played with one another. A mood of jubilation prevailed in
the army camp. They helped the people who had come for the coronation. At
times they were mischievous; but people were too happy to mind them.

The city of Thanjavur was decorated like the celestial city of Amravati in
heaven. Every house in the city had guests.

Finally the day of coronation dawned like any other day. As the sun rose in the
eastern skies drinking the dew drops and spreading golden rays, people in their
excitement exclaimed, “Even sun is happy over the coronation of Ponniyin

Selvan. That explains the extra sheen in the rays we see today.”

Many hours before the appointed time crowds started gathering before the
venue. The hall where the coronation ceremony was about to happen was quite
huge. Even then it could not accommodate all the people. They had to stand
outside. After the coronation Emperor Ponniyin Selvan would come in a
procession riding an elephant. That was the time people could see their new
King and greet him. Even then people did not want to be late for the function. If
they were early and found a place near the venue they could see Ponniyin Selvan
when he comes out with a crown on his head.

There was a special entrance in the back side of the coronation hall through
which the members of the Royal household would come. Emperor Sundara
Chozhan, Empress Vanamadevi came through that entrance. They were followed
by Queen Mother Sembianmadevi, Prince Madhuranthakan, Poonkuzhali,
Princess Kunthavai and Princess Vanathi.

Chief Minister, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, Sambuvaraiyar, General Bhoothi
Vikrama Kesari, Malaiyaman, other chieftains, high ranking officials, members
of the governing council, priests of Shiva and Vishnu temples, poets, artists and
other elite visitors had to wade through the crowd of people to enter the
coronation hall through the usual front gate. Finally Ponniyin Selvan and
Vandhiya Thevan rode into the venue in an open chariot which was designed to
look like a lotus flower. People saw Ponniyin Selvan and like the sea becoming
turbulent on seeing the Full Moon they erupted into a thunderous applause.

The religious ceremonies and rituals connected with the coronation were
completed. The ancestral crown traditionally worn by the Emperor on the day of
coronation, the pearl necklace that would adorn his chest, the sword that would
adorn his waist and the sceptre he would bear on his hand were kept on a large
painted plate and taken around the coronation hall to get the blessings of people.
The invitees touched those things to bless them and the Emperor who was going

to wear them all.

The Court Poet Nallan Sathanar stood up to address the gathering. Behind him
stood a woman who played Yaazh, the ancient string-instrument of Tamilnadu.

The Court Poet sang songs praising the ancient glory of the Chozha clan and the
history great Kings born in that great clan. The songs were set to perfect metre.
But they were quite long and the language was quite archaic. What follows is the
gist of the poet’s composition.

“Manu Manthatha was the great King born in the Solar Dynasty. In that dynasty
was born a King by name Sibi. This King, Sibi, once cut his flesh to give it to a
vulture to keep his word given to a dove. The Kings who were born after him
were called Sembians. A king by name Rajakesari was born in the celebrated
Sembian clan. His son became famous as Parakesari. The Kings who appeared
thereafter called themselves Ko Rajakesari and Ko Parakesari alternately.

A King born in that clan sacrificed his own son in order to render justice to a
cow. Hence he was called Manu Neethi Chozhan. After him came a king by
name Karikal Peruvalathan whose fame spread to all the three worlds. He
marched with his army up to the Great Himalayas in the north and hoisted the
Chozhas' Tiger flag in the snow clad peaks of the great mountain range. In that
line of kings appeared Nalankilli, Nedunkilli, Kulamutraththu Thunchia Killi
Valavan, Koperunchozhan, an ardent devotee of Lord Shiva and added to the
glory and the fame of the great Chozha Clan and attained the Lord’s feet at the
right time.

The sun which illuminates the whole world is at times hidden behind the clouds.
Similarly the fame of Chozha Clan who belonged to the Solar Dynasty was at
times eclipsed by the clouds of enmity of Pandyas and Pallavas. These clouds

were shattered by King Vijayaalaya Chozhan who appeared in the horizon like
the legendary Vajrayudha, the preferred weapon of the chief of gods, Devendra.
King Perumpiduku Mutharaiyar, who appeared like a rat besides the tiger,
Vijayaalaya Chozha, died in war and vanished from history. Vijayaalaya Chozha
then captured Thanjavur and built a temple for the presiding deity of the Chozha
Clan, Goddess Durga Parameswari. The messengers sent by Pallavas, Pandyas
and other Kings to seek the friendship of Vijayaalaya Chozhan filled up the front
yard of his palace. In order to help those Kings who sought his help the great
Vijayaalaya Chozhan went to many battle-fields and sustained ninety six warwounds on his body. His son Adithya Chozhan appeared like a sun who
dispelled the clouds of enemy soldiers. At the Thiruppurambayam battle-field
when the Pallava King Aparajitha was about to be conquered by the Pandya
King, Adithya Chozhan entered the army like a tiger entering into a crowd of
rabbits and destroyed the Pandyan army. He then went as far as Thondai
Mandalam to teach a lesson to the Pallava King who betrayed his friendship.
Adithya Chozhan jumped on the elephant on which the Pallava King was riding
and killed him. And then following his celebrated ancestor Kochenganaan,
Adithya Chozha built eighty two temples of Lord Shiva along the route followed
by River Cauvery from the Sahasya Hills till the city of Poompuhar.

His son Emperor Paranthaka was born carrying the Goddess of valour and
success on his two shoulders. He defeated the Pandya King at Vellore and
brought Madurai and Lanka under his rule. He was like a lion to the army of
elephants of Cheras. He marched even beyond River Tungabhadra in the North.
He was a terror to the Chalukya and the Vengi Kings. Jealous over his evergrowing fame the King of Twin Provinces Kannara Thevan gathered a huge
army which resembled the confluence of the seven seas of the world. He wanted
to defeat Paranthaka at any cost. Emperor Paranthaka’s first son, Rajadithyan
devastated Kannara Thevan and his seven-sea army. He was treacherously killed
while he was riding an elephant.

Emperor Paranthaka built a golden hall and a golden roof for the Dancing Lord
of Thillai. He then attained the feet of the Dancing Lord. His son Emperor
Kandaraathithar, devoted to Lord Shiva, renovated the Shiva temples all over the
Empire and in due time reached the abode of the Lord. In his reign his brother

Arinchaya Chozhan freed Thondai Mandalam from the enemy’s rule and
extended the frontiers of the Empire up to Seetpuli country. Soon Arinchaya
Chozhan too died. Then his blessed son Sundara Chozhan ascended the throne.
The Pandya fox was ducking its head out of its hole. Sundara Chozha sprang on
the fox and made it draw back its ugly head. In the reign of Sundara Chozhan
people which extends till today people were free and happy.

Now what language and what words can we use to praise Ponniyin Selvan who
was born in this clan which has a history of over a thousand years. Perhaps if the
Goddess of Learning were to be born as a poetess, may be She can do justice to
the fame of Ponniyin Selvan by her poetry. An ordinary poet like me cannot even
begin to do justice to the greatness of Ponniyin Selvan.”

The Court Poet Nallan Sathanar thus completed praising the ancient Chozha
clan. Buddhist monks, Sanskrit poets, Shivacharyas, Vaishnava Acharyas were
waiting for their turn to felicitate Ponniyin Selvan. The main problem for the
organisers now was how to enforce the virtue of brevity on the waiting
dignitaries. One person who was really worried was Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. He
was the one chosen to place the crown on the worthy head of Ponniyin Selvan.
Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was exploring ways to cut short the words of felicitation
so that the ceremony ended on time. He was startled by a man who came near
him. How could he have managed to wade through the crowds and enter the
coronation hall - Pazhuvettaraiyar was surprised. But Vandhiya Thevan was not.
He knew that the person was Azhwarkkadian hiding behind a clever disguise. He
looked at Ponniyin Selvan. Ponniyin Selvan seemed to have read the signal.

Nobody knew what Azhwarkkadian whispered into the ears of Pazhuvettaraiyar.
His face was clouded in surprise, grief and shock at the same time. He hesitated
for a second and then dragged Azhwarkkadian to a place where there were not
much people.

Ponniyin Selvan saw what happened. Till then when the Court Poet was singing

the praises of the Chozha Clan the Prince reverentially folded his hands to accept
them with humility. Now he addressed the Poet:

“Honourable Poet, whatever you have been singing till now is about my clan and
my ancestors. Tell me what I have done to deserve the ancient Chozha Throne.
Tell me what makes my head deserve the ancient Chozha crown? It is not
possible for the Goddess of Learning to be present here to sing my praises, why
don’t you do it yourself to the extent you can.”

The poet was stunned. Ponniyin Selvan spoke again.

“It is quite natural that you are stunned. You are not to be blamed. I have not
done anything so far which is worth praising. In fact I have not done anything so
far. I am making a beginning only today.”

Chapter 88: The Coronation

Prince Arulmozhivarman continued his tirade against the Court Poet: “I have
one more question. You sang on the glory of the Chozha Emperors from Sibi to
Kandrathaathithar. I am born in this ancient clan and hence the words of praise
apply to me. But, Honourable Poet, they apply with equal force to my uncle,
Madhuranthakan, the great son of Emperor Kandaraathithar. Do you agree with
me or not?”

The poet, rendered speechless by this sudden outburst, just nodded. The eyes of
everybody in the coronation-hall were now on Prince Madhuranthakan, sitting
humbly at the other side of Emperor Sundara Chozhan. They looked at him as if
they were seeing him for the first time in their lives. Chendan Amudhan, who
was the new Madhuranthakan, was inherently shy. The sudden attention
bestowed on him embarrassed him. He was focusing on a dust particle on the
floor.

Meanwhile Azhwarkkadian who was in disguise had taken Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar to the corner of the coronation hall to share some disturbing
news. He told him that he saw Rakkammal, boat-man Murugaiyyan’s wife, who
was part of the Pandya Conspirators gang. She was in the crowd of people who
had come for the coronation. Azhwarkkadian followed her to find out why she
had she there. She disappeared in the crowd at a place near the palace of Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar. When Azhwarkkadian was scouring the crowd for her, she
suddenly appeared again. But this time there was another woman with her. The
other woman was carrying a child. The other woman appeared to be the daughter
of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.

Azhwarkkadian was too shocked to plan his next move. He was not sure that the
other woman was Pazhuvettaraiyar’s daughter. He wanted to trail them to clear

his doubts. That was easier said than done because of the crowd. Rakkammal
saw him. Suddenly she shouted, “HELP! HELP! This man is stalking us.”

Azhwarkkadian was soon surrounded by people. He prayed and pleaded. He told
them that he too had come to witness the coronation function and had nothing to
do with those women. Before he could convince the crowd and get out of its grip
the two women vanished. Azhwarkkadian ran up to the gates of the Fort looking
for them. He saw the woman with a child getting into a closed palanquin a little
way from the gates of the Fort. Four horsemen stood around the palanquin. As
soon as the woman and the child got into the palanquin they started to move fast.
He wanted to follow them. But before he could do that he was pushed by a large
crowd of people trying to enter the Fort. He was pushed a long distance into the
Fort. He had come to the coronation hall to convey the news to Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar.

He also told Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar that he was on disguise only on the specific
orders of Prince Arulmozhivarman who wanted to know what was in the minds
of people. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar believed his words. He was already worried
about his daughter who had been married to the false Madhuranthakan. He was
shocked by the new development. And confused too.

He told Azhwarkkadian that he had to rush to his palace to know the truth. He
also requested him to explain his absence to Emperor Sundara Chozhan and
Ponniyin Selvan through the Chief Minister.

Ponniyin Selvan already knew. Even while he was conversing with the Tamil
Poet, Nallan Sathanar, he had an eye on Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. As soon as he
ran out of the hall the already glowing face of Ponniyin Selvan’s face glowed
more.

He turned to his father, the Emperor and spoke in a majestic voice:

“Father, the Commander of Thanjavur Fort, Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar has gone out
to attend to an emergency. But let not the coronation ceremony wait for him.
There are many distinguished men in the audience. There are many warriors.
There are many valiant men who have faced many wars and have borne warwounds on their bodies. Any one of them can place the crown on the head of the
future King with their valiant hand. We need not have to wait for Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar to do that.

All of you assembled here have blessed the golden crown, the King’s sword and
the sceptre with your lucky hands - hands which have fought many wars on
behalf of this great country. So if I chose to adorn the crown myself it won’t be
wrong. But before doing that, my Father, I have a prayer to you and all the
valiant men who have assembled here for my coronation.

I belong to the clan of the King who cut his flesh and gave it to a vulture in
order to save the life of a dove. And that is why I am called a Sembian, a name
exclusive to the descendants of the Chozha clan. I am a descendant of
Manuneethi Chozhan who killed his own son in order to render justice to a cow
whose calf was run over by his son’s chariot.

Our ancestors were great warriors who always preferred death at the hands of
their enemies to running away from the battlefield to save their lives. If valour
was important for them, fairness and justice was only more so. I am a descendant
of great Kings who were not just brave and valiant in war but were also fair and
just, even to the weakest of beings, like a dove or a cow. Hailing from a clan of
such a hoary tradition tell me, can I swerve from the path of justice? Can I usurp
something belonging to somebody else? When our Court Poet sang about our
ancestors in beautiful metre I could them see them all in my vision. Raja Kesaris
and Para Kesaris were standing next to each other. My celebrated forefathers,
Nalankilli, Nedunkilli, Perunkilli and Kochenganaar see me through their loving

eyes and say, ”Our dear son, a descendant of our great clan! Wait! Does the
throne belong to you? Please reflect on this question before you sit on it.”

Soon the great Vijayaalaya Chozhan, Adithya Chozhan, Emperor Paranthaka and
Rajadithya see me through their eyes gone red with valour and ask me point
blank: “Son, tell what great act of valour have you done to deserve this ancient
Chozha throne?”

I hesitated for a while. Then steadied myself, folded my hands towards my
illustrious ancestors and made an appeal to them:

“Oh Great ones of the Chozha clan! I have not done even a thousandth of what
you have done. With your blessings to support me and with your life to guide me
I am going to attempt great things from now on. I will strive to do something
that will keep the Chozha flag flying high. I will attempt something to make sure
that the fame of our clan grows and lasts till the end of time and even more. I am
planning to do things which have never been attempted in the past. My feats are
going to be rare and unprecedented. You, the most illustrious and the most
valiant men of this great Empire, are going to praise me for my deeds. I spoke
thus to our great ancestors. Their faces blossomed and they all blessed me.”

Ponniyin Selvan’s speech stirred the emotions of the people assembled. Some
became ecstatic. Some others were quite overwhelmed by emotions. One such
soul raised a war cry:

“Hail our valiant spear!””

It was accorded a thunderous response.

HAIL OUR VICTORIOUS SPEAR””

The sound was heard outside and virtually everyone assembled for the event
inside the sport responded to the war cry.

Ponniyin Selvan repeated the cry again

“Hail our valiant spear!””

HAIL OUR VICTORIOUS SPEAR””

As soon as the sound died down the Prince addressed his father:

“Father, once upon a time this war-cry, which exclusively belongs to the soldiers
of the Chozha army, was heard beyond the North Pennai River, up to the banks
of Krishna and Tungabhadra rivers. That was during the reign of your
grandfather Emperor Paranthaka. The cries sent shivers into the hearts of the
Vengi and Kalinga men, of the Kalyanapuram and Manyaket men. Hundreds and
hundreds of Chozha ships carried thousands and thousands of Chozha soldiers to
the countries in the west, east and south. Trade flourished in this great country.

“Father, ever since you became sick the war cries of our soldiers have become
weak. Enemies have started to appear on all the sides Vengi, Kalinga,
Kalyanapuram and Manyaket and are keen to drag us into an unnecessary war.
They have not thought about the great danger in the form of invaders coming

from beyond the Himalayan rangers. They are burning in jealousy over the
prosperity of Chozha Kingdom.

“I hear that the Lankan King Mahindan has started gathering forces to fight
against us. Pandya King Veerapandiyan is dead. But the conspirators are trying
to place the Pandya crown on somebody claiming that he is the member of the
clan. They want to create chaos and confusion in our Empire. Lankan King
Mahindan and the erstwhile body guards of the slain King Veerapandiyan
colluded to kill one of the greatest warriors our Empire had ever seen – I mean
my brother Adithya Karikalan who was no less in valour than that legendary
Abhimanyu and Aravaan of the epic Mahabharata. In the west the Chera King is
mobilising a huge army of elephants and building a large navy too. A tribe of
ruffians from the West help the Chera King to make the ships.

We are living in the midst of these threats to the security of our Empire, Father.
Arabs have been good in shipping. They go up to China for their trade. They
also visit our ports. They are highly cultured people. A new Arabian tribe,
uncultured and cruel, almost barbarians, has emerged now. This tribe has
suppressed the cultured ancient tribes of Arabs and are robbing the merchant
ships. We do not know as yet whether the men of this new tribe are Arabs or the
people of neighbouring countries. But we can’t see anybody as ruthless and
barbaric as this new tribe. I chanced to meet them in person. Father, you issued
orders to arrest me. Our Commander Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had sent two ships
full of soldiers to execute your orders.”

Emperor Sundara Chozhan interrupted the narration in a choked voice:

“My dear son, don’t you know the reason for my orders?”

“I know, Father. There was a terrible confusion here about who was going to

succeed you. Added to that, you got information on the Pandya conspirators.
You were worried about my safety. Hence you issued orders to arrest me so that
they will safely bring me to your hands. You issued the arrest orders because you
love me too much, Father. You did not want me to be hurt. You wanted me on
your side, safe and sound. I am narrating the incident because I want every one
of you to know what happened. Hundreds of our soldiers had come to arrest me.
There were hardly ten Arabs hidden in the broken ship in Lanka. Do you know
how many of our soldiers were killed and maimed by those Arabs? I saw it
happening before my eyes. I still cannot take that sight off my mind. Those are
the new tribes of uncultured brutes. Those brutes help the Chera King in shipbuilding. Not only that they have connections with the Kalinga. The three forces
are conspiring to destroy our sea-trade. Let the pirates be Arabs or our
neighbours, the Chera people, who are connected to us in many ways. The
question now is not the nationality or identity of the pirates; it’s about saving our
ships and flourishing sea-trade from these uncultured brutes. If we want to
protect our ships we will have to build a strong navy. We should build thousands
of ships. We should train hundreds of thousands of our men in the fine art of
sailing in the sea. Our Tiger Flag should fly in all the islands on the Eastern seas.
We should have an army and naval base in all these islands.

Father, I have given word to our illustrious ancestors that I will do all these and
much more. Father, I seek your permission to begin the great work. I seek the
permission of the elders and veterans, of the warriors and scholars in this august
assembly.”

Ponniyin Selvan paused. Emperor spoke to him.

“My dear son, do you think I will stand in the way of your work? Do you think I
won’t let you enhance the glory of our ancient clan? Do you think that the great
people in this assembly will oppose your plan to build a strong navy and make
our sea-trade grow and flourish?”

The assembly erupted once again.

“Hail our valiant spear!””

HAIL OUR VICTORIOUS SPEAR””

“Yes, Father. Neither you nor the great members of this assembly will oppose
my grand plans for our Empire. Every one present here will bless me and wish
me success in all my endeavours. And if I have to succeed in this mission, apart
from your wishes and blessings, I need something more important. I need a clear
conscience. Without that I can’t be peaceful. If I am not peaceful I won’t succeed
in this ambitious mission.

“I should be convinced that I have not done anything wrong; that I have been
perfectly honest and transparent in all my dealings; that I have not usurped for
myself something which by law, justice and the principles of equity belongs to
somebody else. If I do something against the great principles followed for
thousands of years in our glorious Chozha clan my guilt will kill me. With a
mind weighed down by guilt how can I fight the enemies? How can I win a war?
How can I be confident of fighting on the side of righteousness? Some time back
there was a rumour that I was trying to grab the Lankan throne.”

“But my son, nobody - I am adding enormous stress on the word “nobody”nobody believed it. Nobody here even faintly suspected that you can ever do
something like that.” – The Emperor was quite emphatic and assertive.

“You might not have believed that, Father. But I heard the rumour. I was
shattered, Father. When the Lankan Crown was offered to me literally on a

platter I refused it. I have eye-witnesses. Two of my friends were with me when I
refused the crown. It is my good fortune that they are by my side today.”

The Head of the Buddhist Monks who was present in the assembly stood up.
“Yes, we also know.”

“That was a false rumour and still it hurt me a lot, Father. Yes, you did not
believe me. I am sorry to contradict your words, Father. There were at least
some persons who believed in that rumour. I am not going to go into details now.
Let me for the sake of arguments say that I have grabbed the throne lawfully
belonging to somebody else. Would it not be a disgrace to the Chozha clan? I
will be suffering in guilt so long as I live. I cannot focus on anything. I won’t be
able to serve the nation to best of my abilities.”

Prince Madhuranthakan who held his head down till then now looked up. It
appeared that he wanted to interrupt Prince Arulmozhivarman and say
something. Ponniyin Selvan had cleverly pre-empted his move. He gave a signal
to Vandhiya Thevan. He ran up to Madhuranthakan. He stood by his side. He
bent down to whisper into the ears of Madhuranthakan:

“My dear friend, can you please tell me the first line of the Devaram song
composed by Saint Sundaramurthy?”

Madhuranthakan was surprised. Why this question should come at this crucial
time, he wondered. Nevertheless he answered him, “ Pitha! Piraisoodi! Crazy
One! The one who adorns a crescent moon on his head.”

Vandhiya Thevan was furious: “How dare you call me crazy? Am I crazy? You

are crazy. You are crazy on women. See there. Your wife Poonkuzhali is
laughing at you.”

Madhuranthakan was thrown out of gear. From when did this good friend start
picking up fights with me? Instinctively he turned to the women’s side.
Poonkuzhali was not looking at him at all. As a matter of fact Poonkuzhali,
Kunthavai, Vanathi, Sembianmadevi, and Vanamadevi were engrossed in the
words of Ponniyin Selvan. Their eyes were all fixed on his face. When Prince
Madhuranthakan saw Ponniyin Selvan again he was holding the ancient crown
of the Chozha clan.

“Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar has not come back. So what? Let me conduct the
ceremony of coronation with my own hands. Dear Father, you came forward to
give this crown worn by our illustrious ancestors like Vijayaalaya Chozhan.
Ministers, Generals, Elders, Heads of Council and the common people
unanimously approved your action. So as of now I own this crown. I have the
right to use it in any way I want. There is one person who deserves this crown
more than me. He is elder to me. Definitely his right to this crown is far greater
than mine. And yet he did not claim his right. He is happy to see me crowned.
He saved my life once. He saved the Chozha clan from a great calamity. I have
not done anything half as great as what he did. Therefore, my dear people, I have
immense happiness in placing this ancient crown of our Chozha clan on a head
worthier than mine. I am placing this crown on blessed head of the saintly
Kandaraathithar’s son, on my uncle, the great Prince Madhuranthakan.”

Ponniyin Selvan walked up to Madhuranthakan and placed the crown on his
head. Ponniyin Selvan knew that Madhuranthakan was likely to object to his
action. Vandhiya Thevan had already been alerted. When Ponniyin Selvan came
near Madhuranthakan Vandhiya Thevan placed his hand firmly on his shoulders
making it impossible for him to object the crown.

But Madhuranthakan did not even try to object. He was simply overwhelmed.

His emotions were not under his control. Like a mad man he was staring
pointlessly.

As soon as the crown was placed Ponniyin Selvan shouted:

“Hail Koppara Kesari Madhurthanka Uthama Chozhan!”

Vandhiya Thevan joined.

“Hail Chozha Emperor, Uthama Chozhan.”

Chief Minister and others remained stunned for some time. Then they too
shouted slogans:

“Hail Kopparakesari Madhurthanka Chozhan!”

Sundara Chozhan was too emotional to speak. He threw the flowers on
Madhuranthakan and blessed him.

The women of the Palace followed suit. They threw flowers on the newly
crowned Emperor and greeted him. Madhuranthakan recovered from the shock.
He walked up to his mother Sembianmadevi and folded his hands towards her. It
seemed that the tears from her eyes would never stop.

“My dear son, neither you, nor I, or for that matter anybody cannot go against
the wishes of my Lord.”

Ponniyin Selvan spoke to the assembly once again.

“Poets, Saints, Priests and Monks, you may please change your felicitation
speech to suit the change in the situation.”

They complied.

In a few minutes the news of Madhuranthakan being crowned spread like wild
fire. Vandhiya Thevan and Azhwarkkadian were mainly responsible for the fast
dissemination. They had planted their men at all the vantage points in the streets.
At the right time they made those men raise slogans in favour of
Madhuranthakan.

“Hail Kopparakesari Uthama Chozhan!”

Soon the entire country came to know that Ponniyin Selvan had virtually gifted
the Empire to his uncle Madhuranthakan and was about to leave the country with
a huge navy to control the pirates on the high seas. Some believed it instantly.
They said that it showed the nobility of the Prince. But some could not believe.
“How will anybody gift the crown which was almost placed on his head?”

Many people tried to talk at the same time. Added to that slogans were raised in
favour of Madhuranthakan and Ponniyin Selvan. Soon the excitement of the

people manifested in a kind of undifferentiated noise which resembled the sound
of an ocean during a storm.

Alittle later Madhuranthakan rode on the decorated royal elephant sitting on a
golden howdah specially made for the occasion. It was the official coronation
procession of the newly crowned Emperor. All the doubts in the minds of the
people were cleared. When people saw that their beloved Prince Ponniyin Selvan
was officiating as the mahout for the coronation procession their happiness knew
no bounds.

“Hail Kopparakesari Uthama Chozhan!”

The sound of the slogans echoed against the skies. They respected the Royal
convention and hailed the newly crowned King. But their minds thought of
nothing but the sacrifice made by Ponniyin Selvan. He had already accomplished
a rare feat – he gave up his claim to the throne and sat permanently in the throne
of the people’s hearts. That made the people happier still. Even if Ponniyin
Selvan had been made the Emperor and had come out in a coronation procession
sitting on the golden howdah they would not have been that happy.

Scholars and poets were happy that the young prince Ponniyin Selvan had
already outclassed his great ancestor Karikal Peruvalathan who hoisted the Tiger
Flag on the Himalayan ranges. He had hoisted the flag of his love in the hearts of
people. The story of his great sacrifice was written in golden letters in the annals
of history. They were searching for the right similes and metaphors to express
their happiness. The common man was not worried about the nicety of
expression. If he was moved by the Prince’s act of sacrifice he was simply
bowled over by his gesture of acting as a mahout to Prince Madhuranthakan on
the day of his coronation. That gesture required loads and loads of love and a
heart made of solid gold. Ponniyin Selvan had them all. There had never been a
Chozha King half as great as him; nor will ever be.

The only problem people had on that fateful day was choosing a medium of
expression for their boundless happiness. They tried all the alternatives. They
laughed; they cried; they shouted, they hugged each other; they greeted each
other; they threw flowers at each other; they threw the auspicious rice at each
other; they shouted slogans. And yet they felt they had not fully expressed their
happiness. At least they could have tried to express their happiness. But they
could not even begin to find an expression for the love they had for Prince
Arulmozhivarman.

It was not easy to lead an elephant in the middle of that excited crowd. Ponniyin
Selvan was not in a hurry. He did not goad the elephant to go faster. Instead he
moved with the wave. He saw the happiness of the people. When he saw a
familiar face he had something funny to say. The elephant moved slowly on the
decorated streets of the capital city.

When the procession culminated at the gates of the palace lights had failed and
darkness was setting in. Thousands of lamps placed on the walls of the palace
were competing with the stars in the sky. A shower of flowers fell on the new
Emperor and Ponniyin Selvan from the terrace.

“Oh Mahout!”

“Oh Mahout”

A sweet feminine voice was heard from the terrace. Ponniyin Selvan looked up.
He saw the happy, smiling face of Princess Vanathi.

Ponniyin Selvan shouted to her.

“Hey Girl, you need not have to fear or worry anymore. The reign of Emperor
Uthama Chozhan has begun. In his reign the tiger and the elephant will be
friends. The cat and the parrot will play together.”

Chapter 89: The Arrival Of The Spring

Amonth and a half had passed since the coronation of Madhuranthakan. Winter
season was in a hurry to take leave of the Chozha Empire; it went off earlier than
usual to give way to Spring which came riding on her chariot, the Breeze. Green
parrots compared the colour of their red noses with the pearly sprouts on the
branches of trees. The golden sprouts which had just emerged from the pupil
trees danced to the tunes of the spring breeze. The cuckoos which dropped the
pearly buds from Punnai trees sang happily. The body of Mother Nature shivered
in happiness. Mother Earth swelled in unbearable ecstasy on the onset of spring.
The trees which had been denuded by the rough hands of autumn started to send
out leafy sprouts. Flower bushes found it hard to bear the weight of fresh lily,
rose and jasmine flowers which were in full blossom to welcome the Spring
Maiden. The water flow in the rivers had come down. The rivers no longer
flowed like a woman in rage; they now gently coursed through the gardens and
cities like a shy young woman in love.

The happiness in the heart of Chozha citizens was perfectly reflected the
happiness in their external environment. The paddy fields had been harvested.
The grains had safely reached the granaries. The uncertainty in the political
arena was gone. People were making preparations to celebrate the festival of
Love God in style. The temples were gearing themselves up for the ensuing
Spring Festival. Podiums and stages were erected in all the important street
junctions.

Vallavaraiyan Vandhiya Thevan was mesmerized by those sweet sights as he
rode towards Pazhaiyaarai. For the first time perhaps he was not entering the city
in disguise; nor was he hiding himself from people. He rode through the city
gates and reached the palace of Princess Kunthavai.

Princesses Kunthavai and Vanathi accompanied by their friends and maids were
waiting at the gates of the Palace to welcome Vandhiya Thevan. After
exchanging pleasantries Kunthavai asked him to take rest since he had travelled
for a long time. She asked him to meet her in the palace garden later in the day.

Vandhiya Thevan did not rest for long. He had his bath, had his food and soon
thereafter rushed to the garden. Kunthavai was waiting for him. Judging by the
way they reacted to each other’s presence it was difficult to say who was more
interested in meeting the other. Each wanted to know many things from the
other. But mere sharing of information was not the reason for their excitement.
That was the time to plan their future. That alone was not the cause of their
excitement. The soft sun of the early summer aroused romantic feelings even in
inanimate objects. Imagine what it could have done to two persons who were
head over heels in love with one another.

But they conversed with each other as if they were colleagues working for the
Government.

“I learn that your mission was not fully successful.”

“You are right, Devi. I have never had full success in any of my missions.”
Vandhiya Thevan sighed.

“Please don’t lose hopes. You brought my brother back from Lanka at the most
crucial time. It was because Arulmozhivarman came at that time that the whole
country was saved from disaster.”

“Yes, Devi. I did bring him in. But at what cost? He had to face many attempts

on his life. And finally he had a terrible viral fever. I brought him home as a sick
man. And that too with the help of Poonkuzhali – Oh I am sorry, Devi – Empress
Poonkuzhali. When I entrusted my friend Ponniyin Selvan to the care of
Chendan Amudhan and Poonkuzhali requesting them to take him to
Nagapattinam I never thought that one day they are going to ascend the Chozha
throne.”

“I have not forgotten the fact that it was you who saved the life of Emperor
Uthama Chozhan. Nor has he forgotten it. The Emperor wanted to give you the
post of Chancellor of the Exchequer, after the death of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

“Thank God, I was saved from that danger, Devi.”

“Why do you say that? The post of Chancellor is the most powerful post in the
Empire, next only to that of the Emperor. In our country the Chancellor is more
powerful than even the Chief Minister or the General. Even the Emperor cannot
do anything without the blessings of the Chancellor.”

“Devi, once I had to hide in the underground treasury which was at that time
under the control of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar. I saw heaps and heaps of gold
coins. In the light reflected on the shining gold I saw a spider’s web and a human
skull. At that moment I decided that I will never go to the treasury again in my
life.”

Princess Kunthavai’s smile had a mesmerizing effect on Vandhiya Thevan.

“Even if you became the Chancellor you don’t have to go to the underground
treasury. My brother Arulmozhi has decided to spend all the money there to

build a strong navy for the Chozha Empire. He has even got the permission of
the new Emperor.”

“I learnt that the Emperor, the Empress and Ponniyin Selvan have gone to
Kodikkarai.”

“Yes, they have. They were disappointed that they could not take you with them
for the trip.”

“I am not disappointed, Devi. Even now if I want I can go to Kodikkarai to join
them. I am disappointed that my dear friend Prince Arulmozhivarman married
Vanathi in my absence. I missed his wedding, Devi.”

“So you don’t like your friend marrying my dear friend?”

“Oh My God! Devi I never said that. I am sad that I could not see the wedding. I
must say that Prince Arulmozhivarman is very lucky to have somebody like
Vanathi. As I know my friend very well I must also say that your friend Vanathi
is equally lucky. But what I do not understand is their hurry to get married. What
happened?”

“They were not in a hurry. I was. My parents wanted to move over to
Kancheepuram. I wanted the wedding to happen before they left. And it did
happen. Kodumbalur Chieftain was to a great extent mollified. You know that he
had the greatest shock of his life when your friend placed the crown on
Madhuranthakan.”

“Many were shocked, Devi.”

“We too were. You friends kept the secret to yourselves till the very end.”

“Devi, I thought he would have told you.”

“If it is a few months ago he surely would have. He won’t do anything without
consulting me.”

“Why has he changed now?”

“Bad company. After he became friends with you my brother has changed a lot.
Earlier he used to be transparent. But now he has become shrewd and cunning.”

“Please don’t blame me Devi. The drama of Madhuranthakan’s coronation was
conceived, scripted and directed by your dear brother. I tried to argue with him. I
told him that it was not fair to deceive everybody. Ponniyin Selvan cited the
example of Lord Rama who cheated his country folks and went into the forest at
night. I begged him that at least you should be informed. He told me that at least
once he wanted to something without consulting you and later win your
appreciation for the act. Devi, honestly you like what he did?”

“That’s the best thing he did in his life. Nobody in this world can do better. I am
really proud of my dear brother. I can’t think of a greater sacrifice. I will have to
thank you for being with him in this great mission.”

“Devi, I thought that you wanted to see your dear brother Arulmozhivarman as
the Emperor. “

“Once upon a time I had that dream. But ever since my friend Vanathi took the
terrible vow of not ascending the throne I changed my mind. There is another
reason too. If the younger brother ascends the throne soon after the murder of the
elder one what will the world think of his intentions?”

“Yes, Devi. Prince Arulmozhi was shattered when he knew about the murders
and betrayals in the Royal family in Lanka. But he later consoled himself. When
I was accused of murdering Adithya Karikalan he wanted to become the
Emperor only to save me from punishment. Thank God at the last moment
Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar took the blame on himself and saved me from disgrace.”

“Poor old man! Without him the entire Kingdom sort of looks empty to me. His
place can never be filled.”

“It is really sad that the Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar also passed away soon after
that.”

“Oh My God, is he dead? Are you sure?”

“When I took leave of him he was alive. But how can a man who had a fall from
a great height survive? He should have died. I feel guilty that I was in a way
responsible for the death of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.”

“I want to hear the whole story, if you don’t mind. You and your brother
conspired to evict Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar out of the coronation hall on that day.
Start from there. I could not ask my brother. I thought I could ask you. I know
you two did not share anything with me to honour the adage, ‘Never tell a secret
to a woman.’ Everything is over. Why don’t you tell me what did you plan and
what happened at least now?”

“Devi, that was not the reason for hiding this from you. Prince
Arulmozhivarman wanted to surprise you at least once. “

“To be honest I almost expected something like that. I know my brother too well
to expect anything different. I was worried that things should happen as you
planned.”

“Actually they didn’t Devi. The main purpose was served. But we could not
prevent something that happened on the side. If only we had consulted you we
could have averted that.”

Vandhiya Thevan started a long narration.

Prince Arulmozhivarman thought that if people knew that Madhuranthakan was
to be crowned on that day, there would be needless confusion and unnecessary
objections from various quarters. Kodumbalur Chieftain and Thirukkovalur
Malaiyaman were sure to oppose the decision. Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar had told
clearly at the time of his death that Ponniyin Selvan was to be crowned. So his
brother Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and the chieftains on his side would not allow
Madhuranthakan to take the place of Ponniyin Selvan.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar knew that his son-in-law was not the original
Madhuranthakan. He would not be very enthusiastic to accept Poonkuzhali as
the Empress. Chendan Amudhan, the new Madhuranthakan, his wife
Poonkuzhali and Queen Mother Sembianmadevi might object to the proposed
arrangement. Emperor Sundara Chozhan would not go against the wishes of
Queen Mother. Ponniyin Selvan considered all these factors and hence kept his
plan secret till the last minute. He suspected that a few men, either out of their
love for Ponniyin Selvan, or out of jealousy for Madhuranthakan, might raise
objections. He identified those men well in advance and sent them far away on
one pretext or the other. He wanted one confidante to help him in his master
plan. He chose Vandhiya Thevan for the job and confided everything in him.
They then broke their heads to draft a meticulous plan.

As part of their plan Kandhanmaran, Parthibendran and the Kodumbalur
Chieftain had been sent out of the capital city for some reason or the other. But it
was almost impossible to send away Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. As per the
convention followed for hundreds of years a person from the Pazhuvettaraiyar’s
family had to place the crown on the head of the new Emperor. Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar was naturally chosen for that honour. If he was asked to place
the crown on Madhuranthakan at the last minute he might resist. He might object
and might create a ruckus which might make Madhuranthakan to refuse the
crown. In the least Pazhuvettaraiyar’s refusal might be considered as a bad omen
and that would lead to serious complications.

In order for the plan to be successful Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar should be removed
from the scene during the last few minutes. That was the hardest part of the
coronation drama scripted by Arulmozhivarman. The friends racked their
brains. It was precisely at that time that Azhwarkkadian came in with the
startling information.

Ponniyin Selvan had got the permission of Chief Minister and had earlier
deputed Azhwarkkadian to find out the answers for several questions:

Where are Ravidasan and his gang of conspirators?

Is Nandini Devi still with them?

A child was crowned as the Pandya Emperor at the war memorial at
Thiruppurambayam. Where was he hidden now?

Did Karuthiruman, the one who escaped from the underground jail, join the
conspirators’ gang?

Kandhanmaran claimed that he had killed Vandhiya Thevan. It was conjectured
that the person who should have died at his hand was actually the false, old
Madhuranthakan. Was the old Madhuranthakan dead? Or did he survive the
attack and had joined the Pandya conspirators?

They thought that it may take several weeks, and even months for
Azhwarkkadian to come back with the right information. But he returned in just
a few days’ time.

Azhwarkkadian saw Rakkammal, boat-man Murugaiyyan’s wife and a part of
the conspirators’ gang near Kolli hills. He trailed her thinking that she would go
to Ravidasan. But he was shocked to see Rakkammal walking towards
Thanjavur. He disguised himself and followed her to Thanjavur. At the town of
Uraiyur thousands of people were getting ready to go to the coronation function.
Rakkammal mingled with the crowd. Azhwarkkadian never lost sight of her and
came to Thanjavur trailing behind her. The treacherous woman entered the Fort
and was hovering around the palace of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Azhwarkkadian
was shocked. He ran to Arulmozhivarman and Vandhiya Thevan to share his

findings. They first thought of having the woman arrested. But then they
changed their mind. They wanted to know the purpose of her unusual visit. They
knew that she had come for something very important. She might have brought
some message for Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s daughter.

Arulmozhivarman and Vandhiya Thevan decided to use this information as an
excuse to remove Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar from coronation hall.

When Azhwarkkadian went back to Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace
Rakkammal was not there. The crowd inside the Fort was swelling with every
passing minute. Azhwarkkadian mingled in the crowd keeping an eye on the
gates of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s palace. What he expected happened. Two
women came out of the Palace. One was holding a child in her waist. The other
woman had carefully covered her face with her saree. The woman with the child
must be Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar’s daughter, thought Azhwarkkadian. He could
not decide whether he should stop them or follow them. Meanwhile the two
women disappeared in the crowd. Azhwarkkadian guessed that they should have
gone to the gates of the Fort. He ran there. He saw the two women getting into a
closed palanquin which was being guarded by four armed horsemen.

Azwharkkadian thought that it was no longer prudent to hold back this
information from Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. He ran back to the coronation hall.

Ponniyin Selvan was addressing the Court Poet at that time. As soon as Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar heard the news from Azhwarkkadian he ran out of the hall. He
ran to his palace. His daughter was not there. Now he knew that Azhwarkkadian
was right. As he was about to return to the coronation venue he heard the
slogans:

“Hail Madhuranthakan! Hail Emperor Uthama Chozhan!”

He came to know what happened inside the coronation venue. Things had gone
out of his control and he no longer had a role to play in the function. He took a
few trusted lieutenants with him and went in search of his missing daughter.

He could not bear the thought of his daughter joining hands with the Pandya
conspirators. He rather preferred killing his own daughter than being branded as
a traitor. He galloped fast.

On the same night soon after the coronation festivities were over Azhwarkkadian
apprised Prince Arulmozhivarman of the developments. He discussed the matter
with his friend Vandhiya Thevan. Ravidasan and his gang were cunning people,
well versed in sorcery and other tricks. The short-tempered Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar would be conned by them. He would be caught by them and
tortured, and even killed. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was ready to kill his own
brother when he confessed that he killed Karikalan. Arulmozhivarman suspected
that Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar would not think twice before killing his own
daughter. So it was decided that Vandhiya Thevan and Azhwarkkadian should go
as a team to save Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and bring him back. They were also
given the task of finding the whereabouts of Ravidasan and his gang and their
future plans.

The two-member team followed the trail of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar.
Azhwarkkadian and Vandhiya Thevan enquired at various places to follow his
trail. They realised Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar had taken a zigzag route. Perhaps
those who took his daughter wanted to distract him. They travelled west on the
banks of River Cauvery for a long distance. They took a turn at a place where
Cauvery mingled with River Amaravathi.

Then they started travelling south-west. They reached Anamalai, a hilly region
which formed the border for the Chera and Kongu Kingdoms. After reaching the

foot of the hills their travel became very arduous. There was dense forest
growth. They could hear the sound of wild animals from all sides. They found it
difficult to ride on their horses. At the same time they did not want to travel on
foot – as they were likely to become a prey to some wild animals.

Finally the two men reached a spot beyond which their horses could not go.
They heard a horse neighing nearby. They went to the place and saw Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar’s horse which was being guarded by a man. The man told them
that Junior and the three other men walked up on foot from that point. They left
their horses too to his care and started walking upward. They passed through
dense forest area where even the sunlight could not penetrate. They walked for a
long time. They were going uphill with their visibility restricted to a mere ten
feet.

Finally they reached a bright spot. There was a clearing because of waterfalls.
The water fell straight down from a great height making a lot of noise. There
was no way they could travel further.

The mountain before them was almost perpendicular. They looked around for a
path to climb. It was not there.

They decided to have a bath in the water falls, relax for some time and go back.
They had concluded that Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and his men would have
become prey to some wild animals.

They saw a strange sight. They saw two human figures at the point high in the
mountain where the water fall originated. The two figures were fighting with
each other. They were now dangerously close to the place where the falls started.
One of them was Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and the other was his son-in-law,
Madhuranthakan, the false Madhuranthakan, who, Kandhanmaran claimed, was

killed by him. Azhwarkkadian and Vandhiya Thevan were shocked. For starters
the old Madhuranthakan used to wince merely on hearing the word “fight”. But
now, within a short time he had learnt how to wield the sword and was fighting
with Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar, an acclaimed warrior.

Oh My God, they thought. Junior was retreating. Was he tired? Or was he
withdrawing out of his love and affection for his son-in-law? Whatever may be
the reason he was now dangerously close to the precipice. Perhaps he did not
know that.

Vandhiya Thevan and Azhwarkkadian tried to shout to warn him. But their voice
was subdued by the sound of the water falls. The sound from the water fall was
enough to suppress the roar of a hundred lions and the trumpeting sound of two
hundred elephants. What chance did those two ordinary men had against those
odds? Almost nil.

The tragedy happened before their eyes; they were quite helpless. Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar was fighting his son-in-law and was steadily going back. He
reached the edge. His feet slipped and he fell into the deep valley. The old
Madhuranthakan walked up to the edge, saw him falling down and he
disappeared. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar fell from the height of about sixty feet.
Nobody could survive that kind of a fall. But the two friends wanted to see the
body of that great warrior. They ran up to the valley. They could not see his
body. The water fell down from a great height and had created a small pool
there. The water overflowed the pool dashing against the surrounding rocks. Due
to the constant water fall the pool had become deeper. They thought that the
body might have sunk deep into the pool. In a way they thought that it was
better, for if only the body had hit the boulders it would have been shattered.
Because the body fell straight into the deep pool Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar was
saved from leaving a disfigured corpse.

Azhwarkkadian and Vandhiya Thevan were staring at the water-swirl in the pool

hoping that the body of Pazhuvettaraiyar would be ejected out by the force of
water.

There hopes were not belied. The body of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar came up on
the surface of the pool. The two men jumped into water and brought the body
out. At first they thought he was dead. But there was a faint hope in the corners
of their hearts that there might be some signs of life. So they tried to pump the
water out his body and tried to resuscitate him.

After what appeared an eternity Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar opened his eyes. He had
only a few minutes to live. He used that time to tell them what they wanted to
know.

Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar reached the top of the summit after an arduous struggle.
There he saw his daughter with about a hundred men. Ravidasan invited him to
join his gang. He told him that his son-in-law was the real Pandya King and he
would be crowned soon. Pandyas and Cheras and the displaced Lankan King
had come forward to help his son-in-law. Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar did not
interrupt him because he wanted to know what was in their minds. Then he
shouted at them. He branded them as conspirators and asked them to send his
daughter with him.

“If your daughter is willing to come with you, you can take her.”

Junior looked at his daughter’s face. She was determined to share her husband’s
fate. She refused to go with her father.

“I would rather kill you with my own hands than leaving you with these crooks.”

Pazhuvettaraiyar shouted and unsheathed his sword.

“Who the hell are you to kill my wife?” – His son-in-law Madhuranthakan
appeared from nowhere and started a sword fight with him. Junior was stunned.
He was in a dilemma. Should he kill his own son-in-law and make his daughter a
widow at this young age? This dilemma made him a little hesitant. He wanted to
retreat. He did not notice the water-falls and valley behind him. He fell down.

“My end is near. You leave me here and go away. Let the Chozha Army invade
the Chera Kingdom and Lanka. Take Ponniyin Selvan to Madurai and crown him
there as Chozha Pandiyan. If you don’t do these things our Chozha Empire will
be exposed to a great danger. Pandya Kingdom will go away from our fold. Go
fast. Don’t bother about me.”

The friends did not want to let him die like an orphan in that godforsaken place.
So they decided that one of them should be with him while the other should ride
fast to Thanjavur to carry the disturbing news. Of the two Vandhiya Thevan was
a better horse rider. So it was decided that he should leave for Thanjavur at once
while Azwharkkadian would stay with Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar in that forest.

Chapter 90: The Golden Showers

Vandhiya Thevan ended a long narration about his trip to the Anamalai forest in
search of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar and his daughter.

Kunthavai spoke to him:

“It’s quite strange. It looks like a work of fiction. It is hard to believe that all
these things happened in the world of reality. I know you are very good in
spinning yarn. When you paused frequently, looked up and down, appeared lost
and then continued, my doubts were confirmed.”

Vandhiya Thevan repeated the gesture – he looked up and then down and threw a
pointed glance at Kunthavai.

“Devi, there are places where I spin my yarn. Not with you. I have never played
my tricks on you, Devi. There is a reason for my pauses.”

“Is that too a secret? Can’t you share that with women?”

“I can’t share it with anybody else in the world except you. If you permit me I
will share it with you.”

“I am never against revealing the truth. Please go ahead.”

“I will, Devi. Promise me that you won’t get offended. What I am about to say is
wholly true and nothing but the truth; if it infuriates you I am not to be blamed.
When I talk to you at times accidentally my eyes rest on yours. I don’t know
what you have in those big, black and beautiful eyes, Devi. I am stunned. I am
frozen. I lose myself. I had to look elsewhere to gather myself to resume the
narration.”

Kunthavai’s lips blossomed. Dimples appeared on her cheeks. Her eyes joined
her lips to form a beautiful, wholesome smile, in which her whole being happily
participated.

“There is no magic in my eyes. I have even abandoned the habit of applying kohl
to my eyes. You would have seen only your image in my eyes. That would have
stunned you.”

“Devi, I have seen my images in mirrors. I have seen it on crystal clear waters. I
was not stunned at those times.”

“Do you by any chance compare my eyes to the mirror and water? The mirror
may fade; the water may become muddy.”

“When the mirror fades I will polish it. I will try to keep the water clear. But
how can I prevent your eyes from capturing my image and hold it deep inside?”

“You will see your image in the mirror only you stand before it. Only if the
water is clear you can see your image in it. But whether my eyes are opened or
closed, whether you are before me or not, your image radiates in my eyes. Can
you explain this miracle, Warrior?”

Vandhiya Thevan shivered in bliss.

“I don’t know, Devi.”

“Then listen. You have some secret magical powers. Even the hardened heart of
Nandini, who had come to destroy the Chozha clan was disturbed by you.”

“A few seconds ago you made me ecstatic with your sweet words. Why do you
mention the name of that poisoned snake, in the same breath?”

“There was a time where I too thought of her as a snake. But now when I think
of her I feel nothing but a deep sympathy.”

“To show mercy to Nandini is like showing mercy to the deadly Halahaal Poison
which is keen on destroying the Chozha clan.”

“She is the daughter of Mandhakini Devi, who by her act of selfless sacrifice has
become a Goddess of the clan. She is the daughter of the goddess who saved the
life of my little brother Arulmozhivarman several times. She is the daughter of
the angel who gave her life to save that of my dear father.”

“But Devi, she is the one who instigated the conspirator to throw the spear on the
Emperor. She came as the Lord of Death to our dear Prince Adithya Karikalan.
She seduced the greatest warrior of all times, Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar and made
him to dance to her destructive tunes.”

“Not just Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar, she seduced Kandhanmaran and Parthibendra
Pallavan. She made them puppets in her hand. Even after knowing all these I
can’t hate her. Why did she do that? Only to avenge the death of Veerapandiyan.
She succeeded in her mission. She is a valiant lady. A lady warrior. I feel guilty
that in a way I was responsible for her indulging in such terrible deeds. In her
childhood days we drove her out of Pazhaiyaarai.”

“You did the right thing, Devi. Don’t let your compassion make you forget the
fact that she is the daughter of the avowed enemy of the Chozha clan.
Veerapandiyan’s daughter growing up in Chozha Palace has given raise to
enough complications. If only Veerapandiyan’s daughter had married Adithya
Karikalan.. Oh My God.. “

"In a way it could have been better. The enmity between the two ancient Tamil
clans would have vanished. The two clans would have become one. But are you
sure Nandini is Veerapandiyan’s daughter?”

“I heard Nandini herself saying that. She was telling Karikalan that she is
Veerapandiyan’s daughter. Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar also heard that. That changed
his mind and made him furious. And it was those words that finally killed
Adithya Karikalan.”

“We need to think on that. She might have lied to make Karikalan feel guilty and
finally avenge the death of Veerapandiyan. When Nandini wanted to save
Veerapandiyan from Karikalan’s sword on that fateful day she had told him that

the Pandya King was her lover. Will any woman born in this land call her own
father as her lover?”

“When Karikalan killed Veerapandiyan he was in a state of murderous frenzy.
We could never know what she told him and Karikalan understood her. How do
we know that Nandini called Veerapandiyan as her lover? We have only
Karikalan’s word for it. When finally Nandini told Karikalan that Veerapandiyan
was her father he believed her instantaneously. Moreover Nandini might have
known about her birth only after the death of Veerapandiyan. Devi, you know to
what extent Nandini went to know about her lineage. She acted as her mother’s
ghost and frightened the Emperor. The Emperor almost lost his mind. Didn’t
your dear friend Vanathi see that? It was too much even for her. She fainted.”

“Azhwarkkadian questioned the mad man who was in jail for three years and
who escaped along with you under threat of death. You might have heard what
he told him.”

“I do, Devi. He said that he, Karuthiruman, was the father of Nandini and her
brother.”

“That could be true. Who knows?”

“Then at times even falsehood acquires unusual strength. You would have been
astonished to see Madhuranthakan fighting with his father-in-law on that day.
Madhuranthakan grew up as a timid man. He had never been to a war-front. He
was afraid of fighting. But when he knew that he was the son of Veerapandiyan
suddenly he became valiant and fought like a seasoned warrior. I know how
strong Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar is. Once he grabbed my shoulder with his mighty
hand. Even now when I think of that I can feel a distinct pain in my shoulder.
Madhuranthakan, whom we all thought was a coward fought on equal terms with

such a strong warrior like Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. I can never forget the scene
so long as I shall live.”

“Honestly that makes me doubt your version of the story.”

“It is hard to believe, Devi. The person who had been moving around in
Nandini’s closed palanquin, the person who trembled merely on the hearing the
name of Pazhuvettaraiyars, the person whom we know as Madhuranthakan
fought with a sword against the formidable Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar. Who can
believe that, Devi? But that really happened. I saw with my own eyes.
Azhwarkkadian will come back to confirm my version of the story.”

“Were you able to see Nandini?”

“Why should I see that devil?”

“Please don’t insult her. I am confident that I will meet her some day. I will find
out who her father really is. But don’t talk ill of her. Whoever may be her father
we know for sure who her mother is. That is enough reason for us to love her.
There is another reason too.”

“What is that, Devi?”

“Nandini loved you. She gave her signet ring to you. She helped you to escape
from Thanjavur Fort. When you were caught by the Ravidasan Gang at the bank
of River Coleroon she used all her influence to save your life.”

“Finally she shifted the blame of murdering Adithya Karikalan squarely on me.
She did everything possible to make me appear guilty.”

“Don’t you know why she did that?”

“Why does a snake bite? Or a leopard pounces on a man? How can we explain
the actions of a snake or a leopard?”

"Nandini was not born as a snake or leopard. We at the Chozha palace made her
so. The circumstances were against her. You were also a reason.”

“Oh My God! Why do you blame me, Devi? What harm did I do to deserve this
blame?”

“No, you did not harm her. But she loved you.”

“Oh My God, once again.”

“Men will be always blind to the feelings of a woman. You never suspected what
was in her heart. I knew. That unlucky girl never loved Veerapandiyan. She did
not like Karikalan. She pretended to love them because she wanted to live in a
palace as a queen.”

“I know that, Devi. There was no scope for love in her cruel heart.”

“You are wrong. When she met you for the first time she fell in love with you.
That was real. She was ready to do anything for you.”

“Yes, she was even ready to shift the blame of murder on me.”

“That was for a very specific reason. She wanted you to sever your friendship
and relationship with the Chozha clan.”

“She went to the extent of having me impaled at a prominent road junction at the
capital city. Instead she could have killed me with the sword in her hand.”

“She could have done that if she had wanted to kill you. If only she had halfwinked her eyes Ravidasan’s gang would have killed you in no time. If Senior
Pazhuvettaraiyar had not put the blame on himself, if Ponniyin Selvan had not
intervened for you, if you were really ordered to be impaled, then Ravidasan’s
gang would have saved you from death at the last moment. They would have
taken you with them. Perhaps today you might be part of the gang that is
roaming in the forests of Anamalai Hills.”

“God saved me from that disaster.”

“God saved the Chozha Empire. God made sure that the Chozha Empire did not
lose the service of a great warrior.”

“Devi, Chozha Kingdom is simply magnificent. The swords and spears of five
hundred thousand soldiers are guarding the Empire night and day. My being
there or not would not have made any difference.”

“Didn’t you tell me that the Chozha Empire is surrounded by dangers on all
sides?”

“That is true, Devi. Ravidasan is an astute strategist. He has now created two
claimants for the Pandya throne. Once he crowned a child as the Pandya King.
That Parangusan Nedunchezhian has now joined hands with Amarabujangan
Nedunchezhian.”

“Who is that Amarabujangan Nedunchezhian?”

“That is the new name of the old, false, Madhuranthakan. How can a claimant to
the Pandya throne have the name Madhuranthakan, which literally means “The
Lord of Death to Madurai, the Pandyan Capital” No sooner than Junior
Pazhuvettaraiyar fell down from the top of the hill we heard the slogan “Hail
Pandyan Amarabujangan Nedunchezhian!” The sound was heard above the
sound of water falls.”

“What does the Ravidasan gang gain by having two rival claimants to the
throne?”

“If something happens to one person there will always be the other to fall back
upon. They will use one person to get help from the Lankan King Mahindan.
And use the other to lure the Chera King to their side.”

"You and my brother conspired to crown Uthama Chozhan. I don’t think you
have done good to him. It is not easy in the present situation to bear the burden
of governing this vast empire.”

“I do concede that it is a difficult to be the King during these troubled times. But
do you think that Uthama Chozhan can bear all the burden? Not at all. He is
going to spend his time helping his mother in her worship and renovating the
temples. The one who is going to bear the burden of governance, the one who is
going to ultimately save the country is your brother Prince Arulmozhivarman.”

“That is true. Arulmozhi has the capacity to do that. But he is very young. He
does not have the experience. The two great pillars of Chozha Empire, the
Pazhuvettaraiyars have gone. Senior is dead. From what you say Junior is also
dead.”

“Yes, Devi. Even if he is alive he won’t be of much use to the country. He
would grieve over his daughter and son-in-law.”

“Sambuvaraiyar’s condition is no different. In a few days he has aged several
years. He has lost the enthusiasm to live. Malaiyaman is already very old. One of
his grandsons is dead; the other grand son was not crowned. He is shattered.
Kodumbalur Chieftain is agitated. He could not forgive Ponniyin Selvan who
accepted the crown at first but made Madhuranthakan the Emperor virtually at
the last minute. Kodumbalur Chieftain feels that he has been let down.

“Ponniyin Selvan marrying Vanathi was not a compensation for him. Looks like
he was not interested in that marriage. He said that he was not going to get
involved in politics. He was going to devote the rest of his life to do service to

the temples at Kodumbalur. The other chieftains who participated in the
conspirators’ assembly at the Kadambur Palace feel humiliated by the
developments. Arulmozhi needs good friends and companions. He needs persons
who are strong, intelligent and valiant to support him in his endeavours.”

“Thank God we have Parthibendra Pallavan on our side.”

“I am not sure of his support to Arulmozhivarman. He feels let down on being
sent out of the capital on some pretext when Ponniyin Selvan gifted the crown to
Madhuranthakan. Arulmozhivarman considers you as his best friend.
Parthibendran hates this more than anything else.”

“Devi, his anger is justified. The Pallava Prince has done a lot for the Chozha
clan. I am relatively a new arrival. If you want I will apologize to him and try to
win over his support for Arulmozhivarman.”

“That will be like adding fuel to fire.”

“He is a great warrior. Is there no way to placate him?”

“He himself showed the way. He even broached the subject to my father.”

“The Emperor would have loved to honour his wishes.”

“But that does not depend on the Emperor. It depends on his daughter. His

daughter refused. The Pallava Prince could not bear to see somebody who was
supplying flowers to the temples till yesterday becoming an Emperor. He could
not tolerate a former boat-girl becoming the Chozha Empress. He demanded
that he should be made the King of the former Pallava Kingdom. He wanted the
Emperor to issue a proclamation of independence for the Pallava Kingdom.”

“How can we yield to his request, Devi? That will be like partitioning the great
Chozha Empire.”

“But my father agreed. But the Pallava Prince did not stop with that. He told my
father long ago a Pallava Princess married a Chozha Prince. He now wants to
marry the daughter of Emperor Sundara Chozhan now.”

Vandhiya Thevan’s face fell. It was very difficult to describe the expression of
grief on his handsome face. He did not want Kunthavai to see his face. He turned
to the other side. He was crying inside.

Kunthavai smiled. She stopped the narration and was silent. Vandhiya Thevan
spoke after some time.

“What was the Emperor’s response?”

“How could he respond? It depended on his daughter’s wishes. So he asked his
daughter.”

“What did the blessed daughter say?”

“She said that she was not interested in Parthibendra Pallavan.”

“Why? Why?” -Vandhiya Thevan’s curiosity knew no bounds.

“Her reason was simple. She did not want to leave the country through which the
divine Cauvery flows.”

“Is that the only reason?”

“There may be other reasons too. But she will tell them only to those who are
really and sincerely interested. She won’t tell the reason to some one who halfheartedly asks that question.”

“Devi I ask you now with boundless sincerity and curiosity.”

“Those who are so sincere and so curious will know the reason themselves. They
need not have to be told.”

Vandhiya Thevan looked at her face as if he were seeing her for the first time in
his life. That glance set a series of cosmically important things in motion. A
lightning struck another. A wave hit another wave. Heaven came to earth. Earth
went to heaven. With a mischievous smile dancing in the corner of her eyes,
Kunthavai spoke to Vandhiya Thevan.

“What can I think of a man who cannot know a woman’s mind and wants to be
told explicitly? How can I expect that man to know the scheming and conspiracy
in the minds of the enemies of Chozha Empire?”

Vandhiya Thevan looked up and down.

“Devi, Parthibendran hails from the ancient Pallava clan. He could make that
request to the Emperor. What if the same request comes from a young man, who
is an orphan, who does not even have a hut of his own? Tell me Devi what the
Emperor will think of him and his request.”

“He may think whatever he wants to. But as the request concerns his daughter he
would like to know what is in her mind. He will reply accordingly.”

“I am curious, Devi. What will the daughter say?”

“Why are you beating around the bush? Why don’t you make a request to the
Emperor? You will know his answer, I mean his daughter’s answer
immediately.”

“How can I Devi? How can a poor orphan who does not have a place of his own
seek the hand of the blessed daughter of an Emperor who is ruling over an
Empire which extends from Lanka in the South to Vengi country in the North? It
would be the most preposterous request ever made in this world.”

“From when did the warrior of the Vaana clan become so humble? You bragged

about the glory of your great Vaana clan when you met me for the first time.
When a male child is born in any of the three great clans – I mean the Chozhas,
Cheras and Pandyas - and if the child has a broad chest his mother will be
excited because then she can write all the names of the Vaana King. That’s what
you told me.

“The three great Kings of Tamilnadu, Chozhas, Cheras and Pandyas, will wait at
the palace gates of the Vaana King. When they see the poets coming out of the
Palace loaded with gifts the Kings would say, “Oh that’s my horse. This is my
elephant. That’s my crown. This is my parasol.” That’s what you told me. What
made you suddenly so humble?”

“Your brother, Prince Arulmozhivarman. He hates anybody living on past glory.
He laughs when somebody says that he hails from the Solar Clan; or that he is a
descendant of Karikal Valavan or Vijayaalaya Chozhan. You know what he told
me? “Whenever my ancestors made copper plates or edicts they always start
from the glory of the Solar clan, and start praising their clan right from the time
of Manuneethi Chozhan and Emperor Sibi. When I become the King I will
abolish this practice. In the edicts I order them to write I will ask them only to
talk about what I did. Then the edicts would appear realistic. People won’t
consider them as an exaggeration of a King who was vainly proud of his past
glory.” I cannot but agree with your brother, Devi. From that day onwards I have
kicked this bad habit of gloating over the glory of one’s ancestors. I won’t
approach your father to seek your hand, singing the past glory of my clan.

“Prince Arulmozhivarman and I have dedicated our lives to this great Chozha
Empire. We have a dream of seeing our Tiger flag fly on the peaks of Vindya
Ranges in the north, at Triconamalee in Lanka in the south, at the islands of
Lakshadweep in the west and in the east in Kadaram, Java and Cambodia. After
we have realised at least a part of this dream I will approach the Emperor with
the victory garlands of war and seek his permission to adorn his daughter with
those garlands. I will go to Lanka to vanquish King Mahindan. I will bring back
the ancient crown of Pandyas and the opal necklace said to be gifted by the chief

of gods, Devendra. I will place these treasures at the feet of the Princess. I will
then seek her hand. “If you consider me worthy of holding your hands, please
grant me the boon, my Goddess.”- I will tell her.”

“I appreciate your vision and your determination. I am happy to see the
difference in attitude between you and Parthibendra Pallavan. Under the present
scheme of things only you men can do all those things. You can be victorious in
your expedition. You can bring back the spoils of war. You can be proud of that.
We women can do none of these. They do not need these either. In the past there
was the practice of ‘swayamvar’ where a Princess can choose her husband from
amongst the hundreds of suitors. If my father had conducted such a swayamvar
for me, if he had invited all the great Emperors of the world, I would not have
garlanded any of them, however great and handsome they may be. My eyes will
be looking for that young man, an orphan, who escaped from the Fort of
Thanjavur, came to Pazhaiyaarai, and with the help of the temple priest rode a
boat to my garden and met me in person. I will place the wedding garland only
on the neck of that young man.”

Athousand drums were played in Vandhiya Thevan’s ears. Golden showers fell
from heavens. On the top of the trees green with sprouts and with flowers in full
blossom, colourful butterflies spread their wings and danced in joyful abandon.
Vandhiya Thevan stood up.

“Why, you don’t like what I said?” – Kunthavai.

“What a dumb question, Devi? I am wondering whether I am asleep or awake. I
am wondering whether I heard just now is part of a vivid summer dream or
reality. I realise that this is not a dream, Devi. I have heard that the gods churned
the ocean of milk, extracted the elixir of life, drank it and became immortal.
Your words have made me drunk. Not with any ordinary alcohol. But with the
elixir of life. Your words have breathed a new life into me, Devi.”

“You should bear this always in your mind. You will face dangers in your
expedition. You will fight in many battles. Your enemies will try to kill you. If
your life is in danger, remember, that a Chozha Princess will become a widow
even before her marriage.”

“That will never happen, Devi, as I have become immortal by drinking the elixir
of life, I mean your words of love, Devi. I won’t die. When I am roaming in the
dark forests, when there is a storm and heavy rain, when I lose my way, I will
remember that you will be in a house in the middle of that forest. You will light a
lamp, place it near the window and will wait for me. That thought will give me
the strength to find my way in the midst of storm and rains.

When I am in the middle of a vast ocean, with days, weeks and months passing
by, when I lose my way and go adrift, lost and forlorn you will shine as the pole
star guiding my way back home. I will see you, regain my sense of direction and
steer my ship towards you, Devi. When the sea is turbulent and the waves
appearing like mountains hit the boulders on the shore, in the darkness of the
light, you will be the life-saving light coming from the light house, Devi. That
light will save my small boat from hitting the boulders and will guide my way to
the land. On the vast expanse of desert without any trace of greenery, not even
dry grass, when the sun scorches as if it were hell fire, when I am walking on the
sand, which will be as hot as fire, when my tongue has become dry due to thirst,
when my sweaty legs stagger on the desert sand, you will appear as a fertile
grove full of coconut and plantain trees with a spring of cool water and save my
life, Devi. Wherever I go in this vast world, whatever sufferings I may face, one
day I will come back. I will marry you, Devi. Till my dream is realised even the
lord of death will be afraid to come near me. He can’t come any way, as I have
drunk the elixir of life. I will be like an immortal god defying death.”

Vandhiya Thevan had never talked like that in his life. He sat down. Princess
Kunthavai was looking deep into his eyes. She was sure that it was not the first
time that the handsome warrior uttered those words of love to her. In hundreds of

past lives, hundreds of aeons ago, he had uttered the same words to her
thousands of times.

Was that a hallucination? Kunthavai was wondering.

Her reverie was broken the voice of Vanathi. “Akka! Akka!”

They both turned around.

Vanathi came running to them.

“Akka, he has got an urgent message from Manimekalai’s brother
Kandhanmaran.”

Vanathi proffered a palm leaf to them.

Chapter 91: The Wilted Flower

Vandhiya Thevan got the palm leaf from Vanathi.

“Princess, do you remember me? I thought you have completely forgotten me.”

“How can I? How can I ever forget what you did to me and my dear husband?”

“Oh that was the reason you had your wedding during my absence.”

Vanathi was at her sarcastic best.

“Yes. If you had been there anything could have happened. Like Ponniyin
Selvan’s coronation where there was a last minute change of the King, there
could have been a last minute change of bride. When you two join hands only
God knows what you can do.”

“Do you mean to say that I prevented Ponniyin Selvan’s coronation? It was only
your vow; which you took to snub Poonkuzhali. The boat-girl is lucky. She
became the Empress. What’s the big deal in blaming me, Princess?”

“Let her be lucky. Let her be the Empress. I don’t have anything against her. I
don’t hold anything against you either. I am very happy now. I have a suggestion

for you. When you set date for your wedding get hold of a good astrologer.”

“We will entrust the job to Kudanthai Astrologer. You people trust only in him.”

Vanathi laughed. She turned to Kunthavai.

“Akka, hearing the name of Kudanthai Astrologer I am reminded of something.”
She laughed again.

“What makes you laugh, Vanathi? Oh you mean the nonsense he said about your
son, that he will rule all the three worlds.” – Kunthavai.

“Why do you call it nonsense, Devi? That is going to come true.” – Vandhiya
Thevan.

Vanathi was overcome by shyness and she muffled her laugh.

“Akka, I wanted to tell something. You twisted it. I asked the Kudanthai
Astrologer “From where will the husband of Princess Kunthavai come?” He
answered, “Who knows, he may jump from the sky at this very moment.” The
next minute this man jumped into the room fighting with the astrologer’s
disciple. When I think of it I cannot help laughing.”

Kunthavai attempts to muffle a loud laugh resulted in a mesmerizing smile.

“Enough of your mischief, Vanathi. Let him read the urgent message.”

Vandhiya Thevan read the message. The two women did not fail to notice the
lines of grief which suddenly clouded his handsome face.

“Anything important?” Kunthavai asked him.

“You can read it, Devi.” Vandhiya Thevan passed the leaf to Kunthavai.

“To my dear friend Vandhiya Thevan, greetings from your friend
Kandhanmaran. Please forgive whatever I did to you. Please come to see my
sister Manimekalai for one last time.”

Kunthavai read the message.

“In a way, good news. Looks like, Manimekalai is found at last.”

“What is that? Where had she been?” – Vandhiya Thevan

“You don’t know anything about her?”

“No. I wanted to ask you.”

“I wanted to tell you. But I was a little hesitant because you were so hard hearted
that you did not enquire about her.”

“How can I become hard hearted in her matter, Devi? As far as she was
concerned I am dead.”

“No. For her you are not dead. You have become immortal.”

“That’s all right Devi. Tell me about Manimekalai at least now.”

“I hate to tell that. Sembianmadevi wanted Manimekalai to stay with her. She
explained, argued and even persisted. But Sambuvaraiyar would not listen. He
told her that Kandhanmaran would go for border security. So he wanted at least
one of his children to be with him. He wanted to spend some time with his
daughter. He took her with him. As the Kadambur Palace had been burnt down
in fire he had sought and got the Emperor’s permission to build a new palace for
himself on the northern bank of River Paalaru. On the way he camped near
Veeranarayanapuram. When he woke up the next morning Manimekalai was not
found. He thought that she might have come back here. He sent his men to
enquire. We told them that she did not come here. We were all worried. We even
thought that she might have killed herself. We heard that men were sent in all the
directions to search her. Now reading Kandhanmaran’s message it appears that
she has been found.”

“What is the use of my seeing her now? Anyway she will not recognise me.” –
Vandhiya Thevan.

“Even then you will have to go. See the words “for one last time.” I shudder to
think on the import of these words.”

“Akka, this man is heartless. He does not deserve Manimekalai’s selfless love.
There are people who sacrifice a large empire on the altar of love. This man
hesitates even to travel a short distance for love. What kind of man is he?”

“Princess, there are but a few empires in the world. People who sacrifice an
empire for love are fewer still. But whatever you said is true – that I don’t
deserve her selfless love. Only God deserves that kind of love. Manimekalai’s
love was misplaced. She should have loved God; instead she loved me. I am no
God. I am an ordinary human being beset with all the faults and frailties.
Manimekalai’s love should have been dedicated to God.”

“Even then you will have to go. Kandhanmaran has written “for one last time”.
“- Kunthavai.

“I never said that I won’t go. I am wondering whether there will any use in my
going now. For her I am a dead man. But I don’t understand the words “one last
time” written by Kandhanmaran. Does he say that I should not see her hereafter?
Or is he going to get his sister admitted to a Buddhist monastery?”

“Go there. You will know everything.” Kunthavai.

Vandhiya Thevan took just a day to travel from Pazhaiyaarai to
Veeranarayanapuram. But unlike the earlier occasions the one day appeared as

hundred years to him. His mind was overloaded with so many thoughts,
memories and experiences. When he first passed the way while going to
Thanjavur he saw many pleasant sights. At that time he had built many castles
on air. They did not remain as mere dream castles.

Whatever he considered almost impossible had happened. He had won the
friendship of Ponniyin Selvan – the Prince praised by the whole of Tamilnadu,
the darling of the people of Tamilnadu, the great human being who placed the
crown (that was given to him by all), on somebody’s head and by that act
became taller than the legendary Meru Mountains. He got a place in the heart of
Princess Kunthavai, whom Ponniyin Selvan adored. He got the post of Army
General for the Chozha Forces in Lanka. Did he get them all by his intelligence
or smartness? No.

It was all because of his accidental visit to the Kadambur Palace on that fateful
day, his coming to know of the assembly of conspirators and the events that
followed. So many things happened during the last eight months. His world
turned upside down. The comet that appeared on the skies did its work and
disappeared. Prince Adithya Karikalan is dead.

Was there any connection between Karikalan and the comet? What connection
could be there between the planets, stars and comets which had been there for
millions of years and human beings who are born today and dead tomorrow? But
there was no doubt that a supreme intelligence which was beyond the reach of
human mind, a principle which was changeless and unchangeable, was
managing the lives of human beings. Otherwise how could he have escaped from
all the dangers, and could have survived the numerous attempts on his life,
during the last eight months? How many people had helped him during times of
distress. Who brought these people in to his life almost at the nick of time?
Perhaps the seers call that great force, God. That force was worshipped as
Shiva, Vishnu and Mahasakthi.

When he thought the help he got during times of crisis he was surprised. When
he thought of those kind souls who helped him his heart melted in love and
gratitude. Kandhanmaran harmed him; but Vandhiya Thevan could not forget the
help he received from him earlier. Azhwarkkadian too helped him. Even that
devil Nandini helped him in times of trouble. He was surprised at the
compassion of Princess Kunthavai towards Nandini. He could not forget the help
he got from the boat-girl in all his lifetimes. She is fit to occupy the Chozha
throne.

He had no words to describe the help he got from Chendan Amudhan, who later
became Uthama Chozhan and was crowned as the Chozha Emperor. Simply
because Vandhiya Thevan saved him from the spear of the Doctor’s son his debt
of gratitude could not be considered as repaid. He could repay his gratitude only
by serving the Chozha clan so long as he lived.

Can he afford to forget the help of Senior Pazhuvettaraiyar? There was a time
when he thought that to merely see that great warrior who bore sixty four
wounds on his body. He not only saw him but also became a victim of his fury
and hatred. But in the end he compensated for all the harm he caused him. He
made a confession that that Adithya Karikalan was killed by the knife he threw
at somebody else. He saved Vandhiya Thevan from great dishonour and almost
sure punishment. He was really a saint. How could Vandhiya Thevan show his
gratitude to him?

But that silly girl Manimekalai stood a class apart from all those who helped
him. Why should she love him so much and so selflessly? Why should she lose
her mind? Why should she come forward to shift the blame on herself to save
Vandhiya Thevan? All because of that idiot Kandhanmaran. First Kandhanmaran
had talked high of Vandhiya Thevan to Manimekalai. The silly girl lost her
mind to Vandhiya Thevan at that time. Vandhiya Thevan never knew that.

When Kandhanmaran told him, “Forget my sister. We are planning to get her

married to a King”, Vandhiya Thevan tried his best to forget her. Then he met
Princess Kunthavai. And that helped him to forget Manimekalai. But
Manimekalai never changed her mind. She did not even try. What a sweet love,
mused the Prince of Vallam. She did not hesitate to publicly declare her love for
him. She was modest. She was pure. She was as innocent as a child. She was
naughty.

In a way it was better that she thought of him as dead. She won’t be insane for
all time. Soon she would be all right. She would marry some valiant young man
and live with him happily.

Will that happen? Or am I deceiving myself? Am I responsible for her present
condition? What is the meaning of the words, “Please come to see my sister
Manimekalai for one last time”? Perhaps... perhaps..

The mere thought made him writhe in pain.

Vandhiya Thevan’s horse was as fast as the thoughts in his mind. Thank God
there was not much water in the Coleroon River. There was no need for a boat.
There was no need to change the horse. He got into the river where it was
shallow and crossed the vast river bed to reach the other bank. He saw the ruins
of the once glorious Kadambur Palace. The palace had been fully burnt by fire.
There were some pillars and blank walls charred by fire. Kandhanmaran’s men
were waiting for him near Veeranarayanapuram.

“Where is your boss?”asked Vandhiya Thevan.

“At the lake. In a boat.”

Why should he wait for me at the lake? Vandhiya Thevan reached the bank of
the lake. The large bank of the lake appeared like the wall of a large fort hiding
the huge water body on the other side.

He remembered the first time he was in that place. That was the 18th day of the
Tamil month Aadi, a festival for the people around the place. People had
swarmed all over the place. Men, women and children were in a festive mood.
They were playing games, having feast, greeting each other and in general
having a wonderful time. But now the banks of the lake were almost deserted.
There were but a few people scattered here and there.

When he was there last time water was flowing into the lake through all the
canals. The sound of flowing water at that time resembled the undifferentiated
noise which one heard at a busy market place. But now water was flowing
through only a few canals. The weak sound produced by the water flow
resembled the noise of a dancer’s wail as she was dancing to a pathological song.

Vandhiya Thevan rode on the horse skilfully on the steep gradient and reached
the top of the bank. The scene he saw was different. The lake was not full. Water
was not dashing against the banks. The water started only from the bottom of the
bank. Water was no longer red. It was crystal clear. Near the bank he saw lotus,
Sengazhuneer and other flowering plants which had leaves, buds, half-open buds
and fully blossomed flowers. In some places water was fully concealed by these
plants.

Water from Vadavaaru River did not rush to the lake with foams and bubbles.
There were no boats with sails wide open resembling swans flying low over
water surface. In the corner of the lake where the river water used to flow there
were trees, plants and bushes. In their midst cranes and herons were standing on
one leg and doing their penance for their daily food.

It did not take more than a few seconds for Vandhiya Thevan to observe the
scenery around him. He saw a boat standing near the bank. One of the men in the
boat was Kandhanmaran. He rode to that place. He dismounted and went near
the boat.

Kandhanmaran extended his hand and helped Vandhiya Thevan into the boat.
Then he ordered the boat-men to go ahead. He saw Vandhiya Thevan through a
screen of tears.

“Dear Friend, you have come on time. If you had chosen to come tomorrow you
could not have seen Manimekalai alive.”

It was true that Vandhiya Thevan was hard-hearted. For otherwise he could not
have done so many things within a short span of eight months. But for his strong
heart he could not have risked his life and others’ lives and managed many crises
during the last eight months.

Even then he was shattered by the words of his friend.

He now understood the full import of his friend’s words in his letter: “Please
come to see my sister Manimekalai for one last time.” Vandhiya Thevan’s eyes
were filled with tears.

“What are you saying Kandhanmara? Is her life in danger? I knew that she has
lost her mind. And that was about you and me.” Vandhiya Thevan broke down
into a sob after he uttered those words.

“Dear friend, Manimekalai has got her sanity back. But nobody can tell how
long she will live. I have been praying to every god I know that she should at
least be alive till she sees you.”

Kandhanmaran told him what happened.

Kandhanmaran was renovating the golden palace at Kancheepuram for the
Emperor’s stay. He heard that Sambuvaraiyar had taken Manimekalai with him.
Soon the news came that Manimekalai was lost near the Veeranarayana Lake. He
immediately took leave of Parthibendran and rushed to the spot. His father was
in a state of shock. He could not say anything more than, “She was in the camp
last night. In the morning she was not there.”

He had sent men to Pazhaiyaarai to find out whether Manimekalai had gone
there. He looked for her in the burnt down palace at Kadambur and in the
vicinity. Kandhanmaran also joined in the search operation. He did not think she
might have gone back to Pazhaiyaarai. He thought that she might have
accidentally fallen into the lake and died. He wanted to at least find out her body.
He also thought that she might be roaming in the forests around the lake.

He searched for his sister around the banks of the lake. He also looked for her
body in the canals that went out from the lake. He took a boat and went across
the lake and around the lake several times looking out for her. After four days of
futile search Kandhanmaran suddenly remembered the Mandapam in one of the
islands west of the lake. He remembered that Karikalan and Vandhiya Thevan
who had gone hunting in the forest and Manimekalai and Nandini who had gone
for some water sports in the lake met in that Mandapam once and spent some
time there.

It would have been impossible for Manimekalai to reach that secluded spot by
herself. She could not have gone through the forest inhabited by wild animals.
Assuming that by some means she crossed the forest how did she manage to
cross the numerous canals on the way to reach the spot? But Kandhanmaran
wanted to check. He asked his men to row the boat to the Mandapam there.

As soon as he reached the spot old memories haunted him. At first the
Mandapam appeared deserted. There was no trace of any human being. He
climbed down the steps. He thought that all his dreams about his and his sister’s
future evaporated into hot air. He sighed. When he heard the sound of somebody
else sighing in the vicinity he was shocked. He ran up to the source of the sound.
Manimekalai was lying down on the steps on the other side of the Mandapam.

She had shrunk, she was dishevelled and looked pathetic. Her saree was torn in
many places. He could see scratch marks all over her body. At first
Kandhanmaran thought she was dead. That appeared like the body of a woman
who had been starving for many days, roamed around the forest and finally fell
down and collapsed. Kandhanmaran felt as if his heart was being pierced by a
thousand spears simultaneously.

He lifted his sister, placed her on his lap and wailed. He remembered the sound
of her sighing. He had a faint hope that she might be alive. He ran to the lake
brought fresh water and sprinkled on her face. He also poured some water into
her mouth. He tried to rub her body to bring back the heat. A few minutes later
Manimekalai opened her eyes.

“Is that you, Anna? I knew this would happen. I knew I will see you and him in
heaven. Where is he?”

Manimekalai spoke in a very soft voice. Kandhanmaran had to struggle hard to

muffle a sob that tried to burst out through his mouth. “He is here. He will come,
dear. He will surely come to see you.”

Kandhanmaran knew that Manimekalai was hallucinating. She thought that she
too was dead and hence saw her brother whom she thought was already dead.
And she enquired about Vandhiya Thevan supposedly killed by Kandhanmaran.
Kandhanmaran did not want to contradict her and strain her more. He simply
sailed along. He then described what he did to revive her. He also sent a message
to Vandhiya Thevan asking him to come there immediately.

“Friend, I can never thank you enough for coming here in response to my
message. Manimekalai may not live long. She is a lamp about to be put off. And
lamps usually burn a little brighter before they go off. Her condition is no
different. The one force that still keeps her alive is her desire to see you. She
believes that we are all in heaven now. I beg of you, my friend please don’t say
anything to disturb her dream vision. Pretend to believe whatever she says. I
know you, my friend. When you see her you will be stuck with indescribable
grief. I request you to suppress your feelings and keep a smiling face before
her.”’

The boat had reached the island. They could hear a song. Manimekalai was
playing the Yaazh and singing.

“Yes, Kandhanmara. She is singing.”

They got down from the boat. Vandhiya Thevan heard the song. It was the same
song which she sang when they were in the same place earlier.

In the sweet water-falls, on the mountains,
We held each other’s hand under the shadow of fruit-laden trees.
Was it a mere dream, my dear friend? Or was it just a hallucination
In the garden full of Punnai trees on an evening illuminated by the golden rays
of the sun
He called me there and uttered sweet nothings.
Was it a dream or an elaborate drama of falsehood?
We jumped the security and like thieves we saw each other
He hugged and kissed me.

But did it really happen – Were we really happy?

Vandhiya Thevan waited on the steps till the song ended. Then he jumped two
steps at a time and reached the Mandapam.

When Manimekalai saw him she let the musical instrument roll over from her
lap and tried to stand up. But as there was no strength in her legs she lost balance
and was about to fall down. Vandhiya Thevan rushed to her and held her in his
hands. He bore her on him. He gently sat her down and sat by her side. Then he
placed her on his lap.

Manimekalai looked at his face again and again. She wanted to make sure it was
him and that she was lying on her lap.

“My brother did not deceive me. Heaven is not mere hallucination. The miracle
of love is real.”

“You are right, Manimekalai. It’s all real. This is heaven. It is true that I have
come to see you. It’s not a lie.”’

In spite of his best efforts tears sprang from his eyes. A sob burst out of his
mouth

Manimekalai’s face glowed in divine grace. Bright, cool rays of the moon came
out from her long, beautiful eyes.

Her lips which resembled a pomegranate bud tried to speak something. Vandhiya
Thevan listened with rapt attention. But he could not understand a word of what
she spoke.

Why should he understand? What she spoke were not mere words. When the
golden pot of heart was opened and the elixir of love flowed out there was
absolutely no need for a language. A few minutes later Manimekalai’s pearly lips
converged. Her eye-lids closed. The divine glow on her face faded. It was
replaced by peace that was beyond all human understanding. A breeze blow over
them gently shaking the tree-branch above the Mandapam. Some of the red
flowers in the tree fell down. The flower of life in Manimekalai wilted.
Manimekalai was dead.

Where did her life go? Which route did it take? Did it merge with the wind? Did
it merge with the small waves in the lake? Or did it ride on the sweet songs of
the cuckoo birds on the tree and then flew to heaven? Where did it go? Did it go

to the feet of the Being Of Love, the Supreme Being, which created this and
many other universes and the beings living in them? Or did it merge with the
heart of Vandhiya Thevan who had frozen in that place like a stone statue with
tears continuously streaming out of his eyes? Nobody knew. And if anybody did
they would never tell.

But one thing was certain. We are never going to see the playful, mischievous,
frivolous and naughty Vandhiya Thevan any more. We will only see a matured,
kind and intelligent Vandhiya Thevan seasoned by experience and made divine
by the love of a silly girl, whose name was Manimekalai. The Goddess whose
name was Manimekalai was now living in the temple called Vandhiya Thevan’s
heart. That Goddess would be with him wherever he went and whatever he did.
The Goddess will would support and guide him in all his endeavours.’

Oh, valiant young man! Prince of Vallam! Vandhiya Thevan! We take leave of
you. We do not want to interrupt your mourning. Oh friend of Prince
Arulmozhivarman! May you live long! May your name find a place of pride in
the history of warriors of this great Tamilnadu.

EPILOGUE

(Written By the Original Author Kalki)

Ithank my readers. The historic novel Ponniyin Selvan was serialised for a
period of three and a half years. I bow down to the patience of my readers and
the interest evinced by them in this story.
When this historic serial was but a few months old no one thought that the
readers will be so much fascinated by the story. The ancient historic names of the
characters were a pain in the neck for many readers. But soon the readers got
used to the names as well as the characters. Soon the serial became popular and
reached a stage which made people say that no other serial was followed by so
many with so much passion. The interest and passion never waned.
On the second year after the story started many people from a town called
Paramakkudi in east Tamilnadu had sent greetings on the 18th day of Tamil
month of Aadi. The scene described in the first chapter in the first part of the
serial happened exactly on the same day – the 18th day of the Tamil month of
Aadi at the bank of the famous Veeranarayana Lake.
Many readers wrote to the author expressing their happiness over the serial.
I don’t think that the appreciation was intended for the author of the story. It was
for the glory of the ancient Tamil history. The ancient history of Tamilnadu will
make any Tamilian proud. It is only during the past few years that formal
researches were made into the history of ancient Tamilnadu. Stone edicts and
copper plates unearthed in archaeological surveys are being studied only during
the recent past. Historians use the archaeological evidence to reconstruct the
history of Tamilnadu in parts.
No part of history is complete, perfect and beyond doubt. The history of Pallava
Kings who ruled over Tamilnadu having Kancheepuram as their capital has been
thoroughly researched. We now have some knowledge of the two-hundred year

long Pallava rule in Tamilnadu.
The history of Chozhas has also been well researched. The Chozhas period
started about a thousand years ago. Their period of glory extended for three
hundred years starting from the time of the great Chozha King, Vijayaalaya
Chozhan. Like any other period in history the period of Chozhas is also riddled
with many doubts. But some events of historical significance that happened
during this period are supported by unassailable evidence.
Of these events one stands out from the rest. It was the most important in the
history of Tamilnadu. It would make Tamilnadu unimaginably proud. Even if
you score the history of the whole world ever since the beginning of time you
cannot find anything even remotely equal to this event.
The second son of Emperor Sundara Chozhan (later celebrated as Raja Raja
Chozhan) virtually gifted the crown of the ancient Chozha Empire which was
almost handed over to him on a platter to his uncle Uthama Chozhan.
The copper plates unearthed at a place called Thiruvaalangaadu are quite
unequivocal in describing this historical event:
“The Chozha people wanted Prince Arulmozhivarman to succeed his father
Sundara Chozhan. But Arulmozhivarman respected the claim of his
grandfather’s brother’s son, and his uncle, Uthama Chozhan and abdicated the
throne in his favour.“
This declaration is confirmed by many other copper plates, stone edicts and
books written by many scholars of those days.
The people wanted Arulmozhivarman crowned. The friends and relatives of the
Royal family wanted him to be the king. The soldiers of the Chozha Army
renowned for its prowess preferred him to anybody else. Everybody and
everything favoured Arulmozhivarman. And yet he gifted the Empire to his
uncle Uthama Chozhan.
It is very difficult to find anything even remotely equal to this rare sacrifice.
Emperor Asoka, after winning the battle of Kalinga, decided not to fight any
more. Arulmozhivarman’s sacrifice can be compared only to Asoka’s
compassion.

The summit of this novel Ponniyin Selvan is the matchless sacrifice of Prince
Arulmozhivarman. All the events in the story, the twists and the knots, go
steadily towards this high point of the story. That was the reason the Fifth Part
was titled “The Supreme Sacrifice.”
I am sure all my readers of this historical novel would have realised the import
of the sacrifice made by “Ponniyin Selvan.”
And if there are readers who have not realised the importance of the event it was
because of the author’s inability.. The author humbly concedes his incompetence
and seeks the apology of his readers.
When this novel was serialised many readers wrote letters of appreciation to the
author. At that time the readers were unanimous in praising the author.
But when we read the hundreds of letters received from the readers after the
story ended we find that the readers are divided in their opinion. Some have
appreciated the story and have praised the ending; some have strongly
condemned the author for the way the story ended.
Their main grievance is that the story ended quite abruptly without informing the
readers what happened to many characters of the story.
One silver lining is that even those who have strongly condemned want the story
to be prolonged further. I am quite happy with this stand as that is a compliment
paid to the author albeit in disguise. The novel was serialised for three and a half
years. Instead of shouting at the author, “When the hell are you going to end the
story?” they have asked, “Why have you ended the story so early? You could
have written more. You could have prolonged the story.” That makes me happy.
But I am sad that I could not satisfy a majority of my readers.
There are two strong reasons for choosing this ending.

As mentioned earlier the highlight of the story is the supreme act of sacrifice by
Ponniyin Selvan He gifted the golden opportunity to rule a glorious empire to
somebody else as if he were gifting some small change. To lengthen the story
after this great event would lead to a sort of “anti-climax”. Yes, some readers
are aggrieved that the story ended a bit too early. But if I had prolonged the story

the same readers would have complained otherwise. Soon a stage will come
when the readers will be pestering the author to end the story soon.

There are no rules for writing a historical novel. If there are any I am ignorant of
them. Every author has his own method of story telling. Yet there is an inevitable
difference between pure works of fiction which depend entirely on the
imagination of the author and novels based on historic facts. In the case of works
of pure fiction the author can conveniently give an ending to the story and all the
characters in it. The hero and heroine would marry. Or the hero would die on the
gallows, the heroine would jump into the deep sea to kill herself, while the fate
of other characters in the story can be sealed by adding just a paragraph at the
end.

The heroine and heroine married, were blessed with children and grand children
and they lived happily ever after.

The good were rewarded and the wicked suffered a lot and finally were dead and
gone; or got the right punishment.

While writing a pure work of fiction the author has the luxury of ending the
story with these lines. But it is not easy to end a historical novel like this. That
would not be appropriate in many cases.

In historical novels the characters other than those who died in the course of the
story would figure in history. They would venture into many things and might
succeed or fail in their endeavours. How can we tell that in advance? How can
we tell about the events or characters unless we have solid objective evidence to
support our stand? This is a historical novel. And it ended at a particular time in
history. I just wanted to leave the characters as they were at that time in history.
But now I find that the realistic ending has won the disapproval of many readers.

I now feel that I will have to do something to satisfy them.

These questions are there in the minds of many readers. Those who are
conversant with the history of Tamilnadu will know the answer themselves. For
others I have tried to give simple and straightforward answers to the best of my
knowledge and abilities.

Did Vandhiya Thevan marry Princess Kunthavai?

After facing several impediments finally Vandhiya Thevan marries Princess
Kunthavai. They are highly respected in the Chozha Kingdom. A stone edict in
the Brahadeeswara Temple in Thanjavur describes Princess Kunthavai as
follows: “The elder sister of Raja Raja Chozhan (Arulmozhivarman) and the
wife of Vallavaraiyan Vandhiya Thevan, Kunthavai... “

What happened to Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar?

The iron-man Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar survives the fall and returns to Chozha
Empire. He lives for many years rendering yeoman service to the Chozha
Empire.

What did the Vaishnavite Azhwarkkadian do?

He continues with his espionage work. He spies on Nandini and the Pandya
Conspirators and gives valuable information to the reining Emperor.

What happened to Ponniyin Selvan’s travel plans?

With the help of Vandhiya Thevan Ponniyin Selvan builds a huge navy, keeps
the pirates under check and spreads the glory of the Chozha Empire beyond the
high seas. His uncle Madhuranthakan, crowned as Uthama Chozhan dies 15
years after the coronation. Ponniyin Selvan becomes the Chozha Emperor. He
assumes the name Raja Raja Chozhan and rules the country for many years.

What happened to the old, false Madhuranthakan and his wife, who was the
daughter of Junior Pazhuvettaraiyar?

Instigated by the bodyguards of Pandya King, and with assistance coming from
Chera and Lankan Kings, he grabs the Pandya Kingdom and is crowned as
Amarabujangan Nedunchezhian. When Ponniyin Selvan, Raja Raja Chozhan
comes to power he invades the Pandya Kingdom. The old Madhuranthakan, now
the Pandya King, dies in the war.

What happened to the child who was crowned by Nandini as the Pandya King?

Later in life he also stakes a claim to the Pandya Kingdom. He escapes from the
battle field and conspires to get back the Pandya Kingdom again. He is crushed
by Ponniyin Selvan’s son, Rajendra Chozhan later.

What is the fate of Nandini?

She dies soon after the death of the false Madhuranthakan, later known as

Amarabujangan Nedunchezhian. Emperor Raja Raja Chozhan
(Arulmozhivarman) meets her before her death. She shares with the secret of her
birth and the mystery that surrounded the death of Adithya Karikalan.

Did the predictions of Kudanthai Astrologer of Vanathi’s life come true?

It surely did. We do not know whether the predictions were based on her
horoscope or merely the guesswork of the astrologer. Vanathi’s son (born of
Ponniyin Selvan) Rajendra Chozhan, is later celebrated in history as “The
Chozha Who Won Over Ganges and Kadaram.” But Vanathi sticks to her vow of
not ascending the throne. She dies before her husband Raja Raja Chozhan comes
to power. She is known by another name in history – Ulagamahadevi.

What did the former body guards of the slain Pandya King do?

They strive to establish the Pandya Kingdom. So long as Nandini was alive the
death of Adithya Karikalan was not investigated because there was a fear that
her name would also figure in the enquiry which many members of the Royal
family did not want. Soon after her death, once Raja Raja Chozhan knows about
it directly from the mouth of a dying Nandini, he orders the arrest of Ravidasan
and his gang, punishes them for their heinous crime and confiscates their
properties.

I have answered the burning questions in the minds of my readers concerning the
major characters in the story. I want to add the following information about the
other characters, about whom my readers were not much worried.

Sundara Chozhan lives in the golden palace built by his son Adithya Karikalan

for a period of three years and dies there. History books therefore describe him
as “Pon Maligai Thunchia Thevar” meaning “The King Who Died In the Golden
Palace.” His wife Vanamadevi, the Empress who was the daughter of
Malaiyaman steps into her husband’s funeral pyre and kills herself.

Parthibendra Pallavan is offended by Kunthavai’s rejection. He tries to establish
an independent Pallava Kingdom in Kancheepuram. He fails in that mission and
dies without leaving any issues.

Kandhanmaran builds a new palace on the northwest of River Paalaru and lives
there. He serves the Chozha Empire with utmost sincerity and devotion. He
adds to the glory of the Sambuvaraiyar clan which becomes very famous after
his life time.

I gave this information only to make my readers happy and to give them a sense
of ‘completion’ after they have read a large historical novel. These events could
be the basis for another large historical novel.

The great events that happened in the life of Raja Raja Chozhan who succeeded
Uthama Chozhan, and was succeeded by Rajendra Chozhan, Rajaathi Rajan,
Veera Rajendran and Kulothungan could be the basis of many interesting
historical novels.

I sincerely believe that authors more intelligent and capable than the author of
this novel, will some day write great novels based on the history of Chozhas and
make the people of Tamilnadu proud of their lineage. That indeed will be a great
service to Tamilnadu and its people.

