Whirlwind
Ponni’s Beloved -- Part 2
Kalki’s Ponniyin Selvan
English Translation
Translation first rendition 1993
Translation Revised and reformatted 2022
A Note on the Chozla’s
The Imperial Chozla period is considered a Golden Age
in South Indian History. The Chozlas ruled between the 9th
and 13th century. The heartland of their nation – the Chozla
Nadu - was the fertile Cauvery delta with the Rivers
Kollidam and Agniaru as its northern and southern
boundaries. The territories considered as that of the
Pallavas in the north as well as the Pandiya lands in the
south comprised the beginnings of the Chozla Empire.
One of the earliest Chozla kings was Karikala (c AD
150) who was son of Ilan-chet-chenni `Who had wonderful
chariots drawn by Arab horses.’ He ruled from Kaviripattinam and had well established trade with seafaring
Yavanas (Greeks-Romans), Arabs, Egyptians and Chinese.
Karikala built several dams across the Cauvery. Grand
Anaicut still stands today. In the Cauvery delta `The space
on which one elephant could lie down produced enough to
feed seven.’ The red silt of the Cauvery was their wealth.
Ship-building and temple architecture were established
arts. Foreigners were numerous in sea-ports. Yavanas were
employed as palace guards and to police the streets.
Curiously wrought iron lamps, wine, gold coins and horses
were important imports. Food grain, cotton cloth, black
pepper, other spices, timber, gemstones, and perfumes
were exported. The practice of erecting `hero-stones’ as
memorials for warriors who died on the battlefield was
common during this Sangam Period, and it continued for
several centuries.
By the ninth century, the delta region of the Cauvery
basin was already densely populated; nevertheless, it was
still in the process of being cleared of forest and being
settled. Politically the Cauvery delta was still a frontier
region between the settled lands of the Pallavas in the
north and Pandiyas in the south.

Imperial Chozla’s began their expansion under Vijayala
(AD 841-878). He captured Tanjavur (AD 850) and built a
temple for the Goddess Nishumba-sudini (Durga). He was
at that time a feudatory of the Pallavas. His son Aditya I,
gained complete independence after the battle (AD 885) of
Sri-Puram-biyam near Kumbakonam. He captured the
Pallava territories after a battle in AD 903. His son
Paranthaka I, ruled for 48 years (907-955). The dreams of
these monarchs suffered a setback due to the invasion by
Rashtrakutas from the north: the Chozlas were crushed in
the battle of Thakkolam, North Arcot (949 AD). The next
thirty years were a period of confusion. Gandara Aditya (AD
949-957) and Arinjaya (AD 957) ruled for short periods.
Sundara Chozla (AD 957-973) did regain a large extent of
his territories. His last years were crowned by tragedy and
internal strife; Uttama Chozla (AD 970- 985), son of
Gandara Aditya was presumed to have conspired to murder
the crown Prince Aditya II and forced the father to
recognize him as the heir in preference over the younger
son Arulmozli (later Raja Raja I). Raja Raja I (985-1014)
recovered vast territories including Lanka and began an
unchecked expansion lasting for centuries. Conquest
beyond the seas was achieved by Rajendra I (1012-1044)
who went as far as Bengal, Burma, the Islands of the
Malayan Archipelago, and the Siamese Peninsula. Chozla
influence went even further and the Bay of Bengal was but
a ‘lake for the Chozla navy’ who controlled the pirates and
had sway over very prosperous trade routes.
Kulottunga I is said to have established embassies with
Imperial China. Several hundred years later, during the last
years of Kulottunga III (1178-1218), Jatavarman Sundara
Pandiya I, and later his son Maravarman Kulasekhara
Pandiya entered the heartland of the Chozla country. After
that the empire struggled for its very existence. Upon the

death of Rajendra III (1279) the Chozla territories were
absorbed into the Pandiya Kingdom.

The Story So Far: New Floods - Ponni’s
Beloved Part I
About the year AD 970 Chozla’s of the Tamil Nation
ruled an empire spreading from Cape Comorin, to River
North Pennar. Paranthaka II who was more famous as
Sundara Chozla of Pazlayarai ruled that Empire. His capital
was Tanjavur City which had been captured from Mutharaya Kings by Vijayala Chozla an ancestor. Vanamadevi of
Thiru-kovalur was married to Sundara Chozla. They had
two sons and a daughter. First was Aditya Karikala; then
came Princess Kundavai; and last was Arulmozli who later
achieved historical fame as the great emperor Raja Raja I.
For some time now, Sundara Chozla was bed ridden
with paralysis of his limbs. He was in Tanjavur, unable to
travel or be very active in the affairs of the state.
Two brothers, the minor kings of Pazluvoor:
Ambalavan the Elder Lord Pazluvoor and Kalanthaka, the
Younger Lord Pazluvoor were very powerful in the Empire.
The Elder Lord was in charge of taxation, treasury and
granary. The younger brother was Commander of Tanjavur
Fort.
Aditya Karikala had won fame as a brave soldier who
had entered battle fields by the age of sixteen. He was
anointed as the Crown Prince and now stationed at Kanchi
as Commander-in-Chief of Northern Armies. Arulmozli who
was elected the Commander-in-chief of the Southern
Armies had gone to Lanka with a large army against
Mahinda the Lankan King. Kundavai and her friends, as
well as some other royal womenfolk lived in Pazlayarai the
old Capital.
People were concerned about a comet that had been
appearing in the skies. They felt that some terrible danger
was imminent upon the royal family. A wild rumor was
spreading all around the country. The rumor claimed that
vile conspiracy was afoot. Treason against Sundara Chozla
and his offspring was being plotted. Pazluvoor noblemen
and their cronies, including the chieftain of Kadamboor
were present at the mid-night meeting of treason.
Madurandaka, the son of Gandara Aditya, had been
immersed in practice of Saiva devotion till recent times. His
attitudes changed after he married a daughter of Younger
Lord Pazluvoor. The plotting nobles decided to crown him
after Sundara’s death.
Karikala in Kanchi heard these rumors. He wished to
free his father from the influence of Pazluvoor nobles and
bring him to Kanchi City, where he had built a Golden
Palace. He sends his confidential retainer, Vandiya Devan
Vallavarayan of Vallam, as a messenger to his father and
sister with some letters.
In his younger days, Karikala had been in love with a
girl named Nandini who was raised by a priest. His
Grandmother Sembiyan Madevi forbids that love, saying
that it was not suitable. All the Chozla families held
Sembiyan Madevi in great regard. Aditya Karikala bowed to
her orders, but he could not forget Nandini.
The Elder Lord of Pazluvoor marries young Nandini
after he was past the age of sixty-five. Nandini begins to
rule all powerful from the palaces of Pazluvoor. She seemed
to have a mysterious past and even now trafficked with
sorcerers and assassins plotting against Chozla royalty. She
had the power to enchant and mesmerize anyone who
approached her. At one time she had cast her spells on
Aditya Karikala. She had asked him to kill Lord Pazluvoor,
imprison Sundara Chozla, marry her and ascend the Chozla
throne with her as consort.
Karikala refuses to obey that horrible request. Even
then, he was hesitant about going to Tanjavur; he did not
wish to meet Nandini again; she might weaken his resolve.
Vandiya Devan overhears the secret meeting of
conspiracy at Kadamboor. He chances to meet Nandini near
Tanjavur and gets a signet ring from her. With the help of
that ring, he manages to enter Tanjavur fort and meet the
emperor. While he tries to warn the Emperor about the
conspiracy, Younger Lord Pazluvoor walks in and
intervenes.
In the course of his adventures, Vandiya Devan
happens to enter Tanjavur’s treasure vault. Lord Pazluvoor
tries to arrest him. But Vandiya Devan escapes from
Tanjavur and reaches Pazlayarai. He delivers Karikala’s
letter to Kundavai. Vandiya Devan had met Kundavai
unknowingly at Kudanthai and on the banks of River Arisil
and lost his heart to her. He was now ready to obey her
every command. "Ponniyin Selva, danger threatens the
Empire. Come home immediately!" writes Kundavai to her
beloved brother in Lanka. She asks Vandiya Devan to carry
the message and bring back her brother. Meanwhile both
Pazluvoor brothers proclaim Vandiya Devan to be a spy and
announce a reward of thousand gold-coins for his capture.
Earlier during his travels, Vandiya Devan had met a
man named Azlvar-adiyan Nambi who was masquerading as
a fanatic follower of the Vaishnava faith. Azlvar-adiyan was
a spy who traveled all over the Chozla territories. Who was
his master? This was not clear. Vandiya Devan was unable
to trust him.

Karikala the Crown Prince was
concerned. He had no news from
Vandiya Devan or from his sister
Kundavai. Depressed by his love for
Nandini, he wishes to crown his
younger brother and abdicate. He
then plans to sail away to distant
lands so that he could spread the
name and fame of Chozla’s. He
wants his brother Arulmozli in
Kanchi.
Karikala
shares
his
concerns with his other friend,
Parthiban Pallava, and orders him
to Lanka to bring back his brother
immediately.
Chapter 1 -- Poonkuzlali
The twilight of dusk was calm. Sea waves had become
quiet along the shores of Kodi Karai. Catamarans and boats
turned shoreward. Seabirds which had gone in search of
food were coming home to their nests. White sands
stretched for a distance along the shores; beyond was
forest and dense jungle spreading far into the distance.
Forest trees did not move; leaves did not quake;
silence reigned in all directions. The red-rayed God was
descending quickly towards the line where the sea and sky
met. Cloud groups tried to hide the red-lord and gleamed
with a new radiance.
A small boat floated on the sea near the shore. Tender,
flower-petal waves swayed and pushed the craft gently as if
it were a baby’s cradle. A young maid was in that boat.
When we see her, we remember Sendan Amudan
describing his cousin. Yes; she must be Poonkuzlali.
Befitting her name, a thaazlai (fragrant cactus, screw pine)
petal acquired beauty by gracing her beautiful tresses.
Long, dark curls danced on her rounded shoulders. She had
made a necklace of sea shells and cowries found on the
beach and worn it around her neck. But these gained allure
by being on her body; one cannot say that they added to
her beauty. If beauty itself takes form, what ornament can
embellish it?
Poonkuzlali was leaning back stylishly in her boat and
singing. Even the sea seemed calm, listening to her song.
Perhaps, even the wind did not blow but floated gently
listening to her. The distant forest trees stood still,
engrossed in her melody. The sky and earth were
enchanted into silence. Even the sun hesitated to vanish,
lingering in the horizon, listening to her.

Let us also listen to that honey-sweet lyric, drifting in
the breeze:
When wave-filled seas are still,
why does the inner ocean seethe?
When the earth maid sleeps,
why does the heart feel so hopeless?
Birds in the forest looked for their nests;
the hunter and his woman go homeward;
The sky and the shore are shrouded in silence;
sea waves stop quietly, a breeze crawls softly.
In the mind of that doe-eyed maid,
why does this storm rage?
In the heart of the wayside waif,
why does a whirlwind swirl?
When the sea is ever so quiet,
and a breeze crawls ever so softly,
When the Earth maid is at rest,
why does her heart fill with such sobs?
When ocean waves are quiet,
why does the inner soul overflow?
In the heart of that maid,
why does a whirlwind blow?

What is the anguish that dwells
in the heart of this young maid? No
one knows! What is that pleasantsorrow
that
mingles
in
her
melodious voice? Who knows!
Perhaps they wrote the words of
that lyric with tears! We do not
know; but when we listen to her
song, our heart is filled with a
nameless grief, a sweet-melancholy
that is barely contained.

Poonkuzlali stopped singing and
pulled at her oars a few times. The
boat reached the shore, she jumped
out and pulled it up. Some
catamarans were lying about in a
group on the beach. She lifted the
boat to rest on these logs and
leaned back to survey the scene
around her.
Over there, the fire had been lit
atop the light-house. Its fire burned
brightly and will do so all night
long. It will warn all ships out at
sea, "Do not come near!" The sea
was not deep along the shores of
Kodi Karai. Only small craft and
catamarans could come ashore
along its beaches. If ships and
sailing vessels came near, they
would run aground to be buried in
the sands. In fact, if a ship

happened to strike against those
dunes,
it
would
break
into
smithereens. Thus, the light-house
at Kodi Karai served a very useful
purpose.
On the opposite side, a spire
could be glimpsed amidst the short
trees of the nearby forest. Lord
Shiva, Kuzlagar of Kodi Karai was
enshrined under it. About two
hundred years ago, Saint Sundara
Murti had visited this shrine and
worshipped the Lord dwelling
alone in the forest temple. "Oh!
Dear Lord! Why are you alone like
this in the midst of a forest on this
sea shore? Do you have no other
dwelling? When there are so many
cities where pilgrims come to sing
your praises, why have you come to
this frightening forest in Kodi Karai

to
dwell
in
such
lonesome
splendor? Did this wretched sinner
have to see this sight?" sang the
devout Saint.
What penance is this to dwell here in frightening solitude,
In this forest where the harsh sea-wind blows?
My wretched eyes did see you, Lord Kuzlagar,
Who is your companion in this wilderness?
Multitudes in magnificent forts surrounded by moats,
Many devout pilgrims await to sing Your praises, dear Lord!
Enclosed in this untamed forest fortress of Kodi Karai,
Why do you live in seclusion, dear Kuzlagar, My Lord?

Lord Kuzlagar of Kodi Karai was in the same solitary
state even two hundred years after Saint Sundara had
visited him. The forest had grown even more dense around
the temple. Owls and kites sang from hollows in forest
trees. Only hunters and frightening tribals lived here and
there in isolated huts in the forest.
Yes; there is one difference. There was no light-house
here when Saint Sundara Murti had visited. Only a few
years ago, during the reign of Paranthaka the First, was the
light-house built. A few cottages to house the workers who
had been appointed for the upkeep of the light-house were
built around its base. The priest who conducted services at
the temple also came to live in this tiny village.
Poonkuzlali leaned back on her boat by the sea shore
and looked around. She spied the light-house and wondered
if she should go that way. Just then she glimpsed the cupola
and spire; she made up her mind upon hearing the cymbals
from the temple. What was the point in going back home so
soon? Go to the temple, ask the priest to sing some
Thevaram songs and then go home after partaking the
sacrament-offerings. Having made up her mind, she began
walking towards the temple.

She danced and hummed; she leaped and skipped as
she walked. On the way she spied a group of spotted deer
crossing the sand dunes and going into the forest. A small,
baby deer was leaping and jumping, swiftly with seven or
eight adult deer. Upon seeing them she became excited.
She began following swiftly, with leaps and bounds as if to
catch them. How could she, however swift she was,
compete with the spotted deer? The group was far ahead.
On reaching a particular spot near the forest edge, those
beasts lifted their fore-paws and leaped across. All the
older animals were able to cross the spot in one leap and
reach the opposite side safely. But the calf could not cross
in one leap. Its hind-legs were caught in the mud near the
far side. It gripped the bank with its fore-legs and struggled
as much as it could. But its hind-legs began to sink more
and more in the mud. The mother doe stood on the bank
and gazed at its calf with worry. It could do nothing to help
its calf.
Poonkuzlali summed up the situation instantly; she
scrutinized the land and found where the quicksand ended
and firm ground began. She ran around the muddy sinkhole
and leaped across to a firm trail on the opposite shore,
close to the spot where the deer calf was caught. The doe
panicked at first, but stood nearby, hesitantly. Perhaps
Poonkuzlali knew the language of the deer; she spoke some
words softly as she knelt beside the calf. She stretched out
her hands and took hold of the baby deer’s fore-legs. With
one swift, strong, pull she freed the beast from the
quicksand. For some moments the tiny deer stood with
shivering limbs on the bank. The mother doe approached
close and nuzzled its nose. The next instant, both mother
and daughter had leaped away into the forest.
"Chee! Thankless beasts!" said Poonkuzlali. But she
consoled herself, "They are no worse than humans!" She
walked towards the temple.

After crossing the stretch of sand dunes, she had to
walk through a forest trail bound by thick creepers and
encroaching bushes; she had to climb knolls and go down
dales. One could say that this forest was one of nature’s
unique creations. There were no rock mountains or granite
hills in that region. Everything was sandy. The sea sand had
formed dunes here and there. Bushes and creepers
growing on the dunes had transformed them into tiny
hillocks. Steep valleys were interspersed between such
overgrown dunes. It was not easy to find a way through this
forest. It would seem like one had walked very far; but one
would be coming back again and again to the same spot.
Poonkuzlali walked through this forest quickly and reached
the temple. Flowering trees and bushes bloomed around
and inside the temple quadrangle bound by a wall.
Poonkuzlali walked into the temple, where the priest
welcomed her happily. Very few people came to worship at
that temple; therefore, it was natural that the priest looked
happy about this solitary visitor. The priest gave her the
sacrament-offerings and coconut from the evening service.
"Amma! Will you wait a while? I shall also come home
with you as soon as I lock up here," said the priest. It was
somewhat difficult to walk back home through that forest
after nightfall. One need not worry if Poonkuzlali was the
guide.
"I can wait Sir! I am in no big hurry! You can finish
your chores slowly before we leave," said Poonkuzlali.
She stepped out into the quadrangle surrounding the
temple. Taking hold of a low tree branch she jumped onto
the compound-wall encircling the temple. The corner where
the wall turned was decorated with a large sculpture of a
bull. She leaned back on the bull and stretched out her legs
along the wall. Reclining comfortably, she bit into the
coconut with her teeth and began to eat with relish.

As she enjoyed the wonder of darkness creeping up
from all directions, she heard the gallop of horses. She
looked out towards the direction from which the noise
arose. The sound of trotting horses raised all sorts of
memories and drew her into some dreamworld. Some
unexplainable grief came to fill her heart.
Who could be coming now? How does it matter to me,
whoever it is? For some days now, these comings and
goings have indeed increased. People claim to be coming
on government affairs; going on state missions. Even
yesterday, two men had come. Their very sight was quite
revolting. They forced my brother to row his boat and take
them to Lanka. Of course, they paid considerable money.
May lightning strike their money! Who wants money? What
can one do with money in this wilderness? But my brother
and his wife are very fond of money! I wonder why they
hoard it like this?
The hoofbeats are coming closer and closer. Not one
horse; two horses seem to be approaching. I can see them
now; they are climbing up, slowly, very tiredly from the
hollow, up the sand dune, coming this way. The horses
appear tired as if they have travelled over a very long
distance. A man is seated on each horse. The fellow on the
first horse seems young; looks quite attractive and well
built; some dignity in his posture. But nothing compared to
the charm and distinction of the face that dwells in the
secrets of my heart. In fact, if one examines him closely,
this fellow looks owlish with a flat face!
The first horseman was our old friend Vandiya Devan
Vallavarayan. The man behind him was the Doctor’s son.
Both were worn and weary by the time they had reached
this place from Pazlayarai. Even so, Vandiya Devan’s face
brightened upon seeing the young girl lounging atop the
temple wall. When he realized that she was looking at him,
his naturally enthusiastic spirits revived. He stopped his

horse and stared back at her eagerly. Perhaps he may not
have been so happy if he had known that she was
comparing his face to an owl. How useful it is that one
cannot know the thoughts of another!
Poonkuzlali perceived that the young man was looking
at her. She realized how uncouth she might appear, biting
into the coconut with her teeth ... Suddenly a certain
bashfulness came from somewhere and enveloped her. She
jumped down on the soft white sand outside the wall and
began running along its boundary.
When he saw this, Vandiya Devan also felt like
dismounting and following her. He jumped off and ran
behind her, chasing her. Who can reason with such
meaningless behavior? One could say that the instinct of
humankind which had come down over thousands of
generations had made Poonkuzlali run like that; that very
same instinct made Vandiya Devan chase after her, urging
him to catch up with her. ****
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 2 -- Mudhole
Vandiya Devan ran behind that girl following her
across forest and dune; across thicket and thorn. She was
visible for some time and then she would disappear. When
he was almost sure that he would not be able to catch up
with her, she would appear once again. He remembered the
story of Rama chasing after the elusive golden deer.; this
girl was neither illusion nor magic deer. Of course, she had
the swiftness of a forest creature. How quick she is! Why
am I following her like this? What foolishness is this?
Immediately he found some excuse.
As they neared Kodi Karai he had remembered the girl
described by Sendan Amudan. This must be that
Poonkuzlali. If I make friends with her, she will be helpful in
my mission. Perhaps she can guide me to reach the lighthouse. They had seen the light-house from quite some
distance. But it was not easy to approach. Once they had
entered the forest, the light-house vanished from view.
They went around in circles but found no trail or path. It
was in such a situation that he has seen her on top of the
wall near the temple. When he had intended to accost her
and ask the way, she had run away swiftly like a deer. "I
better go back!" he decided. But how could he accept
defeat while competing with a mere girl?
Oh! Here comes an open stretch of beach. I can see
the ocean beyond. How beautiful it looks -- the blue
expanse of the calm sea. I can even see the light-house; a
fire is now burning brightly on its top. The flames spread a
unique glow all around, creating an enchanting scene.
I must abandon my chase and go towards the light.
No! Never! I can easily catch up with her in this open
space. In fact, this region is not all that sandy. Grass and
creeper have firmed the soil. Mud patches have dried and
formed crusts in some places. I can run fast without any

obstruction and catch her easily. Moreover, she is running
towards the sea; she has to stop when she reaches the
water. Perhaps this peculiar girl will disappear into the sea!
Oh! How foolish of me to not bring my horse. I could have
caught her in a trice if I had been mounted on my steed.
Why is she hesitating? Why is she turning right instead
of running forward to the sea? Is she planning to escape by
vanishing into that forest on the right? I can never catch
her if she gets into the woods. All this chase is one big
waste! Vandiya Devan was tired by now. He was quite
breathless.
She seems to have changed her mind again. She had
abandoned the idea of entering the forest; she had circled
back like a spinning top -- is she going towards the lighthouse? If I quicken my pace, I can easily catch her now ... I
must get hold of her and ask, "Hey girl! Why are you
running scared like this? I have brought you news from
your beloved." How surprised she will be! Sendan Amudan
had not sent any message; but who cares? Can I not dream
up some message?
He used all his remaining energy and sprinted
forward. Suddenly he screamed, "Aawwh!" At first, he was
not sure of what was happening to him. It was clear very
soon: both his feet were being dragged into the quicksand.
Both feet were buried first; next went the ankles. Soon the
mud rose up his limbs.
Oh dear! How foolish of me! The surface seemed hard
and crusted. The mud is quite wet inside. Vandiya Devan
had heard of muddy sink-holes that never dried completely.
Sheep and cattle, horses, even elephants caught in such
mudholes or quicksands would be slowly buried till they
were completely swallowed without a trace. Is this one
such sink-hole? Why, even my knee-caps are buried ... How
much further will I go down? Very soon I will be waist deep.

Will this sink-hole which can swallow horses and elephants
let go of me easily? Dear God! Is this my fate? Should all
my dreams be buried in this mud? The only recourse is that
peculiar girl; she must surely help me. There is no other
savior!
Vandiya Devan began calling loudly, "Oh! Oh! Dear
Lord! I am dying! I am drowning in this mud; is there no
one to lend me a hand and save me?"
Poonkuzlali heard his cry for help. She stopped
running, hesitantly. She understood his predicament in one
second. She looked around and spotted a broken dugout
that lay half buried in the mudhole and half on firm ground.
It must have been a log-boat used long ago when the sinkhole had been filled with water. She pulled it out and
jumped in, pushing it forward with wood poles. How
astonishing! The log-boat is skimming across the mudhole
like a swan gliding over a placid lake! She soon reached the
further shore and jumped on firm ground. She planted her
feet firmly and reached out to take both Vandiya Devan’s
hands. Using a monstrous strength, she dragged him out of
that sink-hole. Oh, dear Lord! What strength in those
delicate hands! Her hands seem even more firm than the
iron grip of Lord Kalanthaka, the Commander of Tanjavur
Fort.
Once he was on firm ground, Vandiya Devan laughed
blithely. Only his legs continued to shiver.
"You think you saved my life by pulling me out! Did you
think that I could not come ashore if you had not helped
me?" he asked.
"Then why did you holler `Help! Help!’ like that?"
asked Poonkuzlali.
"Only to make you stop running."

"Then, I’ll push you back into this mudhole. Get back
by yourself!" She took a step to push him in.
"Oh! No! Noo!" Vandiya Devan moved back.
"Why are you yelling?"
"I am not afraid for my life. I fear the mud! Already it
has dirtied my clothes up to my waist!"
Poonkuzlali smiled as she looked at him head to toe.
"Look at the sea over there! Go wash up."
"Please walk ahead and guide me."
They walked towards the sea shore, making sure to go
around the mudhole.
"Why did you run helter-skelter like that when you saw
me? Did you think I was some terrible ghoul or ghost?"
asked Vandiya Devan.
"No; I didn’t think you to be a ghoul. I thought you
were an owl. You have an owlish face."
"There is nothing wrong with my owlish face when
compared to your monkey face." He mumbled under his
breath.
"What did you say?"
"Nothing. All I asked was why did you run like that on
seeing me?"
"Why did you chase after me like that?"
"I came after you to ask you the way to the lighthouse."
"There! Can’t you see the light-house? Why ask for
directions?"
"I could not see it in the forest. Why did you run like
that?"
"All men are wicked. I never liked any man!"

"Even Sendan Amudan?" asked Vandiya Devan softly.
"Who? What did you say?"
"I mentioned Sendan Amudan of Tanjavur."
"What do you know about him?"
"I know that he is your dearly beloved lover."
"What!? What?"
"Are you not Poonkuzlali?"
"Yes, I am Poonkuzlali. What did you say about Sendan
Amudan? About him being my ..."
"Is he not your beloved?"
Poonkuzlali laughed mirthfully. "Who said that?" she
asked.
"Who else? Sendan Amudan told me."
"Tanjavur is very far away. That is why he could say it
and escape. If not ..."
"What, if not?"
"If he had said that here in front of me, I would have
thrown him into that quicksand!"
"So what? There is plenty of water in the ocean to
wash off the mud."
"The sink-hole in which you fell has swallowed cattle
and horses. It can bury an elephant easily."
Vandiya Devan shivered with fear. He remembered the
feeling of being sucked into the hole slowly. If this girl had
not come to my rescue ... by now I ... He shivered again.
"What else did Sendan Amudan say about me?" asked
Poonkuzlali.
"He said that you were his cousin. He said that there
was no beauty comparable to you even in the world of
Gods."

"Perhaps he has personally visited the world of Gods,
to make such statements! And then, what else?"
"He said that you sing very well. If you sing even the
sea would calm down to listen to you. Is that true?"
"You can find that out for yourself! Here comes the
sea." They came to stand on the sea shore.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3 -- At Midnight
Stars twinkled up above. The crescent moon was
strolling across the low skies like a silver ship gliding above
the waves. The wind had become more brisk and the sea
roared. White waves came rolling out, trying to pull in
those standing on the shore.
"What are you waiting for? Wash away the mud
quickly. I have to go home soon, or I won’t get any food
today; my sister-in-law will lock up the kitchen!" said
Poonkuzlali.
"Is the sea very deep here?" asked Vandiya Devan.
"I have never met a coward like you! The sea is not at
all deep for quite some distance here. Even if you go half a
league into the sea, the water is only waist deep. That is
why we have to light the fire on the light-house every day."
Vandiya Devan stepped into the water hesitantly. He
washed away the mud from his clothes and cleaned himself.
As he stepped back from the water, he saw the Doctor’s son
riding down towards the beach. His own horse followed
behind.
"Oh, dear Lord! What if the horse steps into the
quicksand?" asked Vandiya Devan.
"It won’t. Horses are more intelligent than human
beings," said Poonkuzlali.
"But there is a man on one of the horses! And he is
dragging my horse behind him!"
"Yes; that is quite dangerous. Go run up and warn
him."
"Stop! Stop!" shouted Vandiya Devan as he ran to warn
the Doctor’s son. Poonkuzlali walked up to join them. All
three began walking towards the light-house.

"Why don’t you ride your horse?" she asked.
"No matter; I’ll walk with you."
She went up to his horse and caressed its face. The
horse seemed happy; it twitched its mane and neighed.
"My horse seems to like you. That is good!"
"Why is that good?"
"I have to go on to Lanka. I was thinking of leaving this
horse in your care. Will you take care of it?"
"Sure! I can look after him. All animals make friends
with me easily. Only humans don’t like me ..."
"Why do you say that? Did you know that Sendan
Amudan thinks the world of you?"
"I love animals; hate men!"
"What did men do to you?"
"Men are wicked; full of lies and falsehood; wickedness
is their work."
"You cannot say that about every one! Sendan Amudan
is good! Here, this Pinakapani, the Doctor’s son -- he is very
good..."
"How about you?"
"I am also good. How can I sing my own praises?"
"Why have you both come here?"
"Don’t you know that the Emperor has been ill for
some time now? The Doctor needs some medicinal plants
for the treatment. I believe this forest has several rare
herbs and plants. This man and I have come for them."
"You said that you were going to Lanka, just now?"
"Any herb that is not available here has to be brought
from Lanka. Don’t they say that Hanuman’s medicinal
mountain is still in Lanka?"

"Yes; it is still there! That is why thousands of people
are dying there of the poison fever."
"Oh! Oh! Is that so? I did not know. The palace Doctor
who sent us does not know it."
"I have never seen such liars like you men! Two fellows
came here two days ago. They too said something like this.
But their tale was a little more believable ..."
"Who were they? What lies did they speak?"
"They claimed that some sorcerer had sent them. They
declared that they were going to Lanka to find tiger-claws
and elephant-hair for making an amulet to protect the
Emperor. My brother has taken them to Lanka in his rowboat."
"Oh! Is that so!" said Vandiya Devan. He remembered
Ravidasa the dreadful sorcerer. He recalled the horrible
experience in the night when he had rested in the wayside
pavilion. Oh God! Why am I caught up in such dangerous
missions? There is valor in fighting face to face with one’s
enemy in the battlefield. There, I can express my true
strength and bravery. Why do I get caught up in such
sorcery and treachery? Who are those two who have gone
to Lanka before me? How far can this girl be trusted?
Perhaps she is also part of that treacherous group. No! No!
She seems innocent. I must somehow make friends with
her.
"Poonkuzlali, I shall tell you the truth. Remember what
I said just now? That I came here to collect herbs and
medicinal plants; that is false! I am going to Lanka on a
very important, secret mission. I can tell you if ..."
"No need. Don’t you know that you should not share
important secrets with women? Don’t tell me anything."
"They said that about ordinary women. There is
nothing wrong in telling you the secret."

"How did you know that I am not an ordinary girl? It is
not even half an hour since you met me."
"Poonkuzlali, I liked you the instant I saw you on that
temple wall. Can I ask you something, will you answer
truthfully?"
"Try asking."
"Is it true that Sendan Amudan is not your beloved?
Are you not going to marry him?"
"Why do you wish to know?"
"Amudan is my friend. I don’t wish to do anything
against his interests. But if you really do not care for him
..."
"Say it. Why are you hesitating?"
"I am thinking of trying my luck in that matter.
Poonkuzlali, you must not underestimate love! There is
nothing in this world more divine than love. All those
saints, Appar, Sundara and Sambanda fell in love with God
and sang so many lyrics. Kalidasa has sung about love!
Even Krishna was enslaved by his love for the milkmaids of
Brindavan."
"Sir! I shall say something, listen carefully and
remember it!"
"What is that?"
"I too liked you when I saw you first. I did not feel the
revulsion I felt about the two men who came some days
ago."
"Ha! I am truly fortunate!"
"But do not start any such nonsense about love and
passion with me."
"Why?"

"I do not love Sendan Amudan. But I have several
other lovers!"
"Dear me! Other lovers! Who? How many?"
"I will walk out from my house at midnight. If you
follow me then, I will show them to you. You can know for
yourself!" After saying this, Poonkuzlali roared with loud
laughter, "Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!"
Her laughter disturbed Vandiya Devan’s heart. Poor
thing! This girl must be daft! It is useless to expect any
help from her on my mission. It is better that I do not
discuss my affairs with her.
They approached the largest house near the lighthouse. An elderly gentleman and gentlewoman came out of
the house. He seemed stunned on seeing Poonkuzlali
leading a horse followed by two men.
"Poonkuzlali, who are these men? Where did you find
them?" he asked.
"I didn’t find them, Father! They found me!"
"It’s all the same. How many times have I told you to
get back home before nightfall? You never listen! You
brought two other men the day before yesterday. Now you
have brought two more men! Why have these men come
here?" asked the woman.
"They have come here to collect medicinal herbs for
the treatment of the Emperor," said Poonkuzlali looking at
her father.
"Why Sir? Is this true?" asked that gentleman of
Vandiya Devan.
"Yes Sir. Here is the official letter." Vandiya Devan
drew out the palm-leaf roll of letters from his waist pouch
and handed them to the elderly man. Just then, another roll
fell to the ground from his waist. He quickly bent down and

picked it up to hide it away in his pouch. "I am truly
asinine; I haven’t learnt even after one bad experience!" he
mumbled to himself.
The gentleman unbound his roll of letters and began
reading in the light from the fire on the light-house. His
face cheered up and he looked at his wife, "The Younger
Pirati has sent this letter. We must feed these men. Go warn
your daughter-in-law; she might empty the rice-pot!"
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 4 -- The Open Seas
Vandiya Devan met the light-house keeper in privacy
after the night meal and told him that he had to go as
quickly as possible to Lanka. That gentleman who was
named Tyaga-vidangar expressed his regrets. "Once upon a
time there were several boats and rafts on this shore. Now
all of them have been sent to Sethu. They have been
commandeered as supply vessels for our armed forces in
Lanka. Though I personally own two small boats, my son
took one of those boats yesterday, and went to Lanka with
those newcomers. I do not know when he would return.
What can I do?" asked Mr. Tyaga-vidangar the light-house
keeper.
"Who were those men? Your daughter mentioned that
they were somewhat disreputable."
"Yes; I did not care too much for them. I really do not
know who they were or why they were going to Lanka.
They had the palmtree signet of Pazluvoor. Even so, I would
not have permitted my son to go with them. But my
daughter-in-law is very avaricious -- when those men
promised a bag of coins in payment, she insisted that her
husband should go."
"Sir! What is this peculiar behavior? If an
inexperienced woman orders it, should your son obey?"
asked Vandiya Devan. He then added after hesitating a bit,
"Forgive me. It is your family affair."
"My son! There is nothing wrong in your question. We
have a family curse; my son is ..."
"Is your son speechless, a mute?"
"Not exactly.... why do you ask?"
Vandiya Devan explained how he had stayed with
Sendan Amudan and his mother in Tanjavur.

"Aha! Are you that man? We already have news of you
here. They are looking for you all over the kingdom!"
"Maybe; I know nothing about that."
"Now I understand your urge to go to Lanka in such a
hurry."
"Sir, your surmise is not correct. I am taking a very
important letter to an important person in that island. If
you wish I can show ..."
"No need. The Younger Pirati has described you and
written about you. That is enough for me. But I am unable
to help you on your venture."
"You said that you had another boat?"
"Yes, there is a second boat. However, there is no one
to row it. I can give it to you, if you and your friend can
handle it."
"Oh! Both of us have no knowledge of row-boats or
sails. In fact I am somewhat afraid of water. And in the
open sea ..."
"Even if you know rowing, you cannot take a boat out
to sea without experience. After a while, the coast will
vanish from view and you would be lost in the open seas
without any sense of direction."
"Anyway, I cannot take the man who came with me to
the island. I have to leave him here to collect the medicinal
plants. You must think of something to help me."
"There is one way; it is not easy. You can try, if you are
lucky ..."
"What should I do? I can surely try!"
"There is no one in these parts who is comparable to
Poonkuzlali in handling boats. She has crossed the sea to
Lanka several times and has been even farther. I can tell
her; you can also ask her," said Mr. Tyaga-vidangar.

"Sir! Please call her immediately. We can ask her," said
Vandiya Devan without patience.
"No. She is very stubborn. If we ask her now and she
refuses, we can never change her mind. I will talk to her
tomorrow when she is in a better mood. You can also ask
her when she is alone with you."
Mr. Tyaga-vidangar then went away to the light-house
tower. Vandiya Devan went up to the front porch to lie
down. The Doctor’s son who had come with him had gone
to sleep much earlier. Vandiya Devan was also extremely
tired after the exhausting journey and was soon asleep.
Suddenly sleep was gone. The noise of a door opening.
Vandiya Devan made an effort to open his tired eyes.
Somebody emerged from the house and walked out. He
recognized the figure as a woman. The light-house fire cast
some light on her; it was Poonkuzlali, no doubt about that.
What had she said? "Follow me at midnight. I’ll show you
my lovers!" I thought it was a joke. Now, she is really
walking out at midnight. Where is she going? If she is really
going to meet a lover or lovers, will she tell me about it?
There is some mystery about this. Or, is she ... why should I
not follow her? I have to talk to her tomorrow and somehow
convince her to take me to Lanka in her boat. Following her
now might be useful. Suppose some danger befalls her!
And if I can save her from that! She may be more open to
my suggestions.
Vandiya Devan got up quietly and followed Poonkuzlali.
He had not forgotten his experience of the evening in the
mudhole. He did not want a similar thing to happen again;
therefore, he followed her quickly without losing sight of
her. It was vacant beach for some distance around the lighthouse; he could see her clearly for some time. He
quickened his steps intending to catch up with her; that
was not possible. She seemed to go faster and faster. She

did not seem to even notice him following her. Soon they
had reached the edge of the forest full of overgrown dunes
and valleys. She walked around the towering sand dune
and reached a rocky finger of land extending out into the
marshy sea side. Poonkuzlali turned a corner and walked
even more rapidly. Vandiya Devan, following far behind, felt
"At least I have not lost sight of her!" Suddenly he could
see her no more!
How could she vanish so quickly? What magic was
that? Is there some depression far ahead? He ran up
quickly to that spot and looked all around. She could not
have walked away in three directions: it was flat marshland
and she would be visible if she had walked that way. He
took a few cautious, but firm steps and made sure that
there were no sinkholes in that area. She must have
climbed up this dune and gone into the forest. He found the
traces of a trail winding through the short bushes on that
dune. Vandiya Devan began climbing that trail. His heart
beat could be heard loudly. Even the light from the lighthouse was not visible here. The crescent moon had already
set. He had to find his way by the twinkling starlight. After
a while even the faint trail was gone. The bushy shrubs and
short trees began to take monstrous forms. Their shadows
turned in to ghouls and ghosts. Shadows moved when
leaves shook in the breeze. Every movement sent a shiver
through Vandiya Devan. What dangers lurk around what
dark corner? Poisonous reptiles and horrible beasts can
pounce on me from anywhere. Danger can fall from above;
or strike from behind. Why am I caught in this quandary?
How foolish, I did not even bring my spear!
What is that noise? Is that a shadow on the branch?
Two spots of light, gleaming from that dark bush -- what
are they? He could not control the trembling in his limbs.
Fine! There is nothing for me here. How foolish of me to
come here and be frightened, let me go back ... As he was

about to turn back, he heard a voice. A girl sobbed; then a
soft song:
Even as the wave-filled sea is quiet,
why does the inner ocean seethe?
Even as the Earth maid sleeps,
why does my heart fill with sobs?

Vandiya Devan abandoned the idea of going back. He
began climbing higher towards the voice. Soon he reached
the top. She stood there; Poonkuzlali. She was singing; she
was singing to the stars, looking up at them. She
considered those heavenly bodies a rapt audience and sang
to them. Those astral bodies shivered on hearing her sad
lyric.
One of those stars was Dhoomaketu, the comet. The
comet’s tail was long and spreading like a fan. The
silhouette of the young girl at the peak, the dark sky, the
bright comet, her voice and sad melody -- all these made
Vandiya Devan lose his sense of perspective. He had
reached the top of that hillock. Now, he stood in front of
her; facing her. Behind her, very far away, he could see a
faint light -- the light-house. Like a fence keeping the sea
within bounds, white waves rolled languidly along the
shore, as far as the eye could see.
"You have come! I thought you were sleeping like
Kumbakarna on the porch."
"I woke up on hearing the door open. You walked so
fast; without even looking back. It was very difficult to
follow you."
"Why did you follow me?"
"What a stupid question! You asked me to follow you!
Have you forgotten?"
"Why did I ask you to follow? Do you remember?"
"Why not? You promised to show me your lovers!
Where are they? Let me see them -- your lovers!"

"Over there! Look behind you!" said Poonkuzlali.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 5 -- Insanity
Vandiya Devan turned, and looked. His intestines rose
from his abdomen and blocked his chest. They rose even
higher to choke his throat. A thousand shafts of lightning
shot through his body. A million red-hot needles pierced his
every pore. Such a horrifying sight appeared before his
eyes.
In that darkness which spread endlessly, ten, twenty -a hundred fiery furnaces took form; they had neither smoke
nor light. Neither were any embers rising from burning
wood. They were pure shafts of fire; somehow, they rose
from the ground and stood upright. Suddenly some shafts
vanished. Other fiery columns rose to take their place. It
was a giant monster of dark hue; a gargantuan demon with
an immense mouth in his headless torso. He did not have
merely one mouth; he had several orifices which opened
and shut slowly one after the other. When he opened a
mouth the shaft of fire rose in an ethereal glow. When he
shut a mouth, the light was masked.
When Vandiya Devan saw this sight, he felt as if every
pore in his body oozed blood. He had never experienced
such terror. He had not been this petrified even in the
dungeons of Elder Lord Pazluvoor. He heard demonic
laughter, "Ha, ha, ha, ha!" behind him and turned back to
find Poonkuzlali. If it had been any other circumstance, that
laughter itself would have given him a fright. Now, that
very same laughter gave him courage. The fact that a
human being, a girl made of flesh and blood stood next to
him acted as a pillar of support.
"Did you see my lovers!?" asked Poonkuzlali. "These
fiery ghosts are my lovers. I come here at midnight to make
love to them!"

There was no doubt about this girl being completely
deranged! How can I depend on her to take me to Lanka?
Some other thought struggled to emerge from his
subconscious mind. What was it? What was it? Something
about these fiery ghouls...
"Can your friend Sendan Amudan compete with these
lovers of mine?" asked Poonkuzlali’s voice from some deep
well. He was trying to remember something. Finally, after
much struggle and mental conflict he recalled: -Such apparitions are natural in marsh lands formed by
water stagnation over soils rich in sulphur! When sulphur
gasses spring forth from the earth, such phosphorescent
columns arise at nighttime. The steaming sulphur appears
like fiery shafts shooting from the marsh. Some columns
last a long time; some come up in short bursts of steaming
liquid. Ignorant country-folk fear this natural phenomenon
thinking it to be ghosts and phantoms. He remembered
reading about these facts; about the discussions with elders
and childhood tutors. Reason and fear tussled; reason won.
There was no point in explaining all this science to this
foolish girl at this time. Somehow, I must calm her down
and lead her back.
"Girl! Your lovers won’t go away anywhere. They will
stay here. We can come back tomorrow and see them, can’t
we? Come let us go home."
Poonkuzlali did not reply; she began to sob ceaselessly.
Vandiya Devan wondered how to handle this new nuisance.
He waited for some time and finally said, "Girl! can I go
back?"
The sobbing continued. He felt useless. "Fine, do as
you wish. I am sleepy, and am going back!" he declared as
he started down. Poonkuzlali stopped crying immediately.
With a few quick steps she went down first and stood back.
Vandiya Devan ran down to join her. They walked towards

the light-house. How can I trust this insane girl and get
into her boat? Cross the ocean? But no other option seems
to exist. What soothing words can I say to make her feel
more friendly?
Poonkuzlali asked, "The comet Dhoomaketu can be
seen in the sky. What do you think about it?"
"I have no thoughts about it; a comet can be seen -that is all!" said Vandiya Devan.
"They say that disasters will occur if a comet appears
on the sky."
"Yes, some say that."
"What do you say?"
"I have not studied astrology. I know people say such
things."
They walked silently for some time. Again, Poonkuzlali
spoke, "They say that the Emperor is not keeping good
health. Is that true?"
She is not all that deranged, sensed Vandiya Devan. He
felt a little more confident. "I saw him personally. The
Emperor is bed-ridden. He has no sense of feeling in both
his legs. He cannot even take a single step. Have I not
come to gather medicines for his cure? Woman, will you
help me in one thing?"
She gave no reply, but asked, "They say that the
Emperor is not likely to live too long, he will die soon; is
that true?"
"If you don’t help me now, it may happen. I believe that
there are some rare medicinal plants in Lanka. They say
that the Emperor can be cured if we bring those medicines
to him. Will you row your boat for me and come to Lanka?"
"Suppose the Emperor dies, who is likely to ascend the
throne after him?" Vandiya Devan was stunned by this

question from Poonkuzlali.
"My dear girl! Why should you and I worry about that?
How does it concern us whoever gets the throne?"
"Why shouldn’t we be concerned? Are we not subjects
in this empire?"
This girl is not at all insane! I have to be very careful
with her. There must be some reason behind her peculiar
behavior.
"Why are you quiet? Who will ascend the throne next?"
she asked again.
"Aditya Karikala has been coronated as the Crown
Prince. By law he must ascend the throne next."
"Madurandaka -- does he not have any rights?"
"Has he not declared that he does not want to rule?"
"He said that before. Now, he apparently wants his
kingdom."
"Is it enough if he wants it? Don’t people have to
approve?"
"Many big-wigs are said to be in his favor ..."
"Yes. I heard that too. I am surprised that such news
has reached even your ears."
"What will happen if Sundara Chozla dies suddenly?"
"There will be confusion all over the nation. That is
why I need your help now, to prevent any such thing ..."
"How can I help?"
"I told you earlier; I have to go to Lanka urgently, to
bring some medicinal plants. Can you row your boat and
come with me to the island?"
"Why do you need me? Are you not ashamed to ask a
girl to row her boat for you?"

"Your father said that there was nobody else. I believe
even your brother left yesterday."
"So, what if he is gone? Don’t you have two hands?
Doesn’t the fellow who came with you have two hands?"
"We know nothing about boats..."
"There is nothing magical about boats. If you pull the
oars it will glide by itself!"
"Shouldn’t I know navigation? What if I am lost in the
open seas?"
"If you are lost, drown in the deep sea! What am I to
do about that?"
They had reached the light-house. Vandiya Devan
wanted to end this fruitless conversation. He did not wish
to provoke her further and confirm her refusal. Even
though she seemed to refuse, her tone and words gave him
some hope.
He could not sleep when he went to bed the second
time. Like that earlier night in Kadamboor, all sorts of
thoughts jostled his mind, greatly confused by bits and
pieces of information. He was able to sleep only in the late
hours of the night.
He was in some dreamworld. He was seated in front of
Poonkuzlali in a small sail boat. The sea was around them
on all four sides; water everywhere. A pleasant breeze. The
boat was floating on that breeze. Poonkuzlali shone with a
radiant beauty. Black curls danced on her forehead. Her
saelai folds floated in the wind. He had forgotten where he
was going or why he was going. He felt that he had
journeyed this far merely to go sailing with Poonkuzlali.
Something was missing. What was it? Oh! It is Poonkuzlali’s
song. Hadn’t Amudan praised her song?
"Dear girl! Can you not open your coral red lips and
sing me a song?" asked Vandiya Devan.

"What did you say?" asked Poonkuzlali with a smile.
Ah! That smile is worth a thousand worlds!
"Open your sweet lips and sing me a melody!"
"If I sing you a melody, what will you give me?"
"I will come near you and on your soft cheeks ..."
Poonkuzlali drew a sharp dagger from her waist. She
raised the weapon with her hand. "Watch out! If you take
even one tiny step beyond that sail-post, I will use this
knife. The sea fish are very hungry!" she said.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6 -- Hidden Lair
Vandiya Devan was aroused by bright, red rays of the
rising sun. Even after sleep faded, it took him a while to
regain all his faculties. It took a few minutes to
differentiate between the rays of the sun and the fire-light
from the light-house. Which incidents of the previous day
were real and which were dreams? -- nothing was very
clear.
Only the light-house keeper’s wife and her daughterin-law were to be found in the house. They said that the old
man had gone to collect flowers for the service at Kuzlagar
Temple. Vandiya Devan was hesitant to ask those women
about Poonkuzlali. His eyes surveyed all the rooms, but
Poonkuzlali was to be found nowhere. After he had eaten
the morning meal provided by them, he decided to look for
her near the temple. Instead, he found her father. The old
man was gathering flowers from trees and bushes
surrounding the temple wall. He said that on some days,
Poonkuzlali would come with him to help him weave flower
garlands; but she had not come today.
"She must be somewhere in the woods, chasing after
deer or wandering along the seashore. Go find her and ask
her," he said. "Thambi, but be careful about one thing. She
can be very dangerous. Don’t think of romantic poems you
have read and venture into dalliance with her -- she will
turn into a veritable demon. Your life may not remain
yours!" warned the light-house keeper. Vandiya Devan
shivered thinking of his dream of the previous night. He
then walked into the forest looking for that peculiar girl.
Where was he to look for her in those woods? Tiring
quickly, he felt like getting out of the forest; presently, he
began walking along the sea shore. Though he had walked
quite some distance, there was no sign of Poonkuzlali. He
turned back thinking, "Anyway she must come back home

for the midday meal. I can get hold of her at that time." A
sudden urge came upon him to get into that shallow sea
and bathe in its cool waters. The sea seemed calm without
too many waves; Poonkuzlali had said that it was not deep
along this coast. Then, why hesitate? It was important that
he get rid of his fear of the sea. Particularly, now that he
was to travel across oceans on boats and ships, he must
surely overcome this fear.
He removed his waistband, pouch and scabbard and
placed them on the beach. Slowly he took a few steps into
the water. As he walked further, the depth did not increase
beyond his knees. When small waves dashed against him,
the water rose up to his waist -- that was all! "What a
ludicrous ocean this is?! There is no depth even to dive
into?" muttering such words he walked some more. Oh!
Dear me! I seem to have come away quite far thinking that
this sea is not deep. Suppose the tide rises suddenly? What
if the waves increase in size? As soon as this thought
occurred, he turned to look back at the shore. It was true,
that he had come away quite far from the beach; however,
the sea cannot rise suddenly!
Oh! There comes Poonkuzlali! I must go back and talk
to her. I must talk pleasantly and try to gain her favor.
Perhaps she is coming this way to meet me. She is walking
this way, making some sign. Oh! Oh! What is that? Why is
she bending down over my clothes? Why is she picking up
my waist pouch? "Hey girl! Don’t touch that! That is mine!"
She can’t hear me ... over the noise of this sea.... Ah! she
did hear me; what is she saying ... "Poonkuzlali don’t take
that, it is my pouch... Here you! Wont you listen? Why are
you walking away with my waist belt and pouch? Stop!
Stop! ...."
Vandiya Devan began running towards the shore.
Poonkuzlali turned back once, to look at him. She too began
running. She was running away from the village and light-

house, towards the forest. Ah! This is a wretched girl! Or
insane! How am I to recover my pouch from this mad girl? I
must do it somehow... He stumbled into the waves once or
twice and even swallowed some salt water in his hurry.
Finally, he came ashore and began running after that
girl. As he followed, her steps hastened. In the distance he
could see a group of deer prancing away. What a beautiful
sight it was -- spotted deer jumping and leaping away in
fright! Even this girl is leaping and flying ... in no way is
she less graceful than those four-legged beasts. There is
nothing comparable to the grace of these girls raised in the
wilds.... Ah! But I should not utter such nonsense to her. If I
prattle such compliments, the whole venture may be
jeopardized. I must remember her father’s warning. But
why is she running like this? Like one possessed? If she
disappears in the forest, it will be difficult to find her ... Oh
dear! She has run into the trees. There can be no fool
comparable to me in this whole world! Can a garland
caught in the hands of a wild monkey remain intact?
Soon, he too was in the forest wandering here and
there. In his hurry he was careless about parting the
bushes and branches properly; his whole body was
bleeding, scratched thorny creepers and bushes.
"Poonkuzlali! Poonkuzlali!" he shouted. In his agitation he
began asking things like, "Hey Tree! Did you see
Poonkuzlali? O Crow, did you see Poonkuzlali?"
What is this? Am I turning insane myself? Just as he
was loosing hope, something fell in front of him, from the
tree above. Yes, it was his waist band and pouch. He went
up and eagerly opened his pouch. The roll of palmleaves,
the bag of gold coins -- everything seemed intact.
"Is the money safe?" asked a voice from above him. He
looked up to find Poonkuzlali sitting on a branch above him.

Vandiya Devan was weary and dripping with sweat; with
some rage he said, "I have never seen a monkey like you!"
"And I have never seen an owl like you! Dear me! How
you stare at one!" said Poonkuzlali.
"Why do you vex me like this? If it is money that you
want..."
"Chee! Who wants your money!"
"Then, why did you run away with this?"
"If I hadn’t done it, you wouldn’t have followed me into
this forest. You might have gone back to my house."
"What if I had returned to the house?"
"Come, climb up this tree, you will see."
"What will I see?"
"You can see ten or fifteen horses; shining swords and
spears."
Her face indicated that she was speaking the truth.
Nevertheless, Vandiya Devan wanted to make sure; so he
climbed the tree. He bound his pouch tightly around his
waist before climbing -- perhaps she had dropped it
accidentally and this is a trick to get it back, who knows?
He stood on a branch and looked towards the light-house.
Yes; she had spoken the truth. There were ten or fifteen
horsemen near the village. Who were they? Pazluvoor
soldiers come to arrest him -- who else could they be?
Poonkuzlali had saved him from significant danger.
Why? With what intention? -- something is not clear ... Both
climbed down to the ground. "Poonkuzlali, you have saved
me from great danger. Many thanks to you." Vandiya Devan
spoke sincerely.
"Total lies! Do menfolk ever feel thankful?" asked
Poonkuzlali.

"Don’t equate me to all men!"
"Yes! You are not like all men; quite unconventional."
"Woman! Can I ask you something?"
"You are welcome! Answering you is my wish and will."
"Why did you think of protecting me? Why this sudden
concern for me?"
Poonkuzlali was silent; her face showed that she was
slightly unnerved. She thought of something and finally
said, "I am always partial to fools."
"Thanks! How did you know that those soldiers had
come in search of me?"
"Can’t I comprehend by seeing your face? -- It is
obvious that you are escaping and hiding from something. I
suspected it yesterday. This morning, your friend -- that
Doctor’s son -- confirmed it."
"What did he prattle?"
"As soon as he woke up this morning, he said that he
had to look for herbs in the forest. I agreed to guide him
and brought him here. Soon he began making a pass at me.
I said, `You friend is ahead of you...’"
"Why did you say that!?"
"Oh, be patient! Listen to me. I said that you were in
love with me. He began expressing his doubts about you.
Apparently, he suspected that you were escaping from fear
of some royal censure; several incidents on the way made
him feel that way. `Don’t trust a fellow like him and waste
your life. Marry me!’ he said. `You seem to be in such a
hurry? Don’t we have to ask the elders?’ I said; your dear
friend replied, `Let us follow the ancient tenets and
consummate our relationship in secrecy!’ How is this
story?"
"That despicable sinner!" said Vandiya Devan.

"By then I heard the sound of galloping horses. I
climbed a tree to confirm my suspicions and then told him
to look. Even now I feel like laughing if I think of how his
legs shook as he stood on that tree branch..."
"Enough of this joking; what happened afterwards?"
"He climbed down and said, `See! What I said is true!
Those soldiers have come to arrest him.’ I then said, `That
means they are likely to arrest you also for having come
with him. Go run and hide yourself somewhere!’ He left me
and did exactly what I expected of him ...."
"Why? What did he do?"
"He said that he was going to hide and ran directly
into their midst; and was caught by those men"
"Oh dear! Poor fellow!"
"Don’t feel too sorry for him; keep some sympathy in
reserve."
"Why do you say that?"
"Listen to the rest, you will understand. He walked
into their midst; they looked at him with surprise. They
examined him and talked amongst themselves. `Who are
you?’ he asked them. `We are hunters; we have come to
hunt deer.’ said one of those horsemen. This fellow said,
`No! No, you have come to hunt me, I know!’ They were
even more surprised as they provoked him further. Finally,
this fellow said, `You have all come in search of Vandiya
Devan. If I expose him to you, will you let go of me?’ They
agreed. He then led them to my house."
"Traitor! Sinner!"
"When those horsemen had gone ahead, I came in
search of you. You were bathing in the sea."
"Why did you not tell me all this on the beach itself?
Why did you run with my waist belt?"

"Would you have followed me so quickly if I had not
done that? You would have said that you would deal with
those soldiers and walked towards them! Perhaps you
would not have even believed me. By the time I explain all
this, those soldiers might have spotted you ...."
Vandiya Devan felt ashamed to have thought that she
was insane. I must trust her completely. Without her help, I
cannot cross the sea and go to Lanka. All my journey this
far will be wasted; I will be arrested by those soldiers of
Lord Pazluvoor. "Woman! I cannot tell you how much you
have helped me. But you must help me some more ..."
"What do you want me to do?" she asked.
"You saw the nature of my friend -- there is no point in
trusting him. You should row your boat and take me to
Lanka."
Poonkuzlali was silent.
"Can you believe that I am not likely to do anything
wrong. Dear girl! I have to go to Lanka on an important
mission as quickly as possible. You must help me in this
regard ..."
"If I help you, what will you give me in return?"
For the first time her face showed signs of shyness.
Cheeks dimpled and a playful smile increased the radiance
of her face. Vandiya Devan remembered her asking a
similar question in his dream of the previous night. He also
recalled the reply he had been about to give. He was about
to reply with similar words; but he bit his tongue and
stopped himself.
"If you help me this time, I shall not forget till I have
life in me. I shall remain beholden to you forever. I do not
know how I can return your favor. If you want me to do
something in return, I shall surely do it."

Poonkuzlali became lost in thought. It seemed as if she
was hesitant to say something.
"If I can do you a return favor, tell me. I promise to do
it..."
"Is it a promise?"
"Yes; it is a promise."
"Then I’ll tell you when the time comes. You won’t
forget, will you?"
"Never; I shall wait for you to ask the return favor; till
then I will remain beholden to you."
Poonkuzlali continued to think for some time. "Fine!
Come with me. I shall take you to a place in this forest. You
must remain there till dusk today; perhaps go without
food."
"Don’t worry about that. This morning your sister-inlaw served me day-old rice and I ate more than my fill just
to annoy her. I do not need any food till nightfall."
"I don’t know if there will be any food even by night.
I’ll try and bring something. Anyway, you must stay in this
place till nightfall. After darkness, I shall come back and
call for you. Have you heard the nightingale call `koo
kooo’?"
"Sure; I have heard its call. Even otherwise, I can
recognize your voice."
"On hearing my call, you must come out of hiding. We
should be in the boat and ready to leave within one jamam
(three hours) after nightfall."
"I’ll wait for the call of the nightingale."
Poonkuzlali led Vandiya Devan to a sand dune in the
middle of that forest. The other side of the sand dune was
covered more thickly with shrubs and creepers than the
rest of the surrounding area. She pushed those creepers

aside easily with her hands and stepped into a hollow
beside a tree. Vandiya Devan followed her. He saw the roofedge of an old ruined building in that depth. Overgrown
forest and sand had covered it completely; except from that
one point, none could even spot a building in that place.
"A leopard used to live in this place. After it, I live
here. It is my own personal hideout. When I don’t wish to
see any human being, I usually come here to hide. There is
water in that mud-pot. You must spend the rest of this day
here. Don’t come up even if you hear voices, horses
galloping or any other kind of commotion. Don’t come up
on the dune to see what is happening," said Poonkuzlali.
"Do you want me to stay in here even after sundown?
What if some forest creature -- a tiger or leopard comes?
asked Vandiya Devan.
"No tiger or leopard lives here anymore. Only jackals
and wild boar might come. You are not afraid of a jackal or
wild boar, are you?"
"I am not afraid! What if they come and fall upon me in
the dark? I don’t even have my spear with me. I left it in
your house."
"Here, take this weapon," said Poonkuzlali as she
picked up a weapon from the floor of that lair. It was a
curious instrument. It was long and curved like a sword -studded with sharp thorns on both sides. The thorns
seemed stronger than steel. Perhaps Lord Indra’s
thunderbolt was fashioned like this!
"What weapon is this? What is it made of?" asked
Vandiya Devan.
"This is the tail-bone of a fish. When the leopard that
lived in this lair came to pounce on me, I killed it with this
fish bone!" said Poonkuzlali.
***

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 7 -- Ocean Princess
Vandiya Devan was able to spend that day easily; more
than half the time went in sleep. Hours of wakefulness
were spent in contemplating the peculiar character of
Poonkuzlali. What an astonishing girl! What a pleasing,
lilting name! But such a severe attitude ... Not merely
`severe’ -- mixed with some sweetness too! How nonchalant
she was, when mentioning about her killing the wild
leopard! Such intelligence and forethought! But sometimes
she behaves like one deranged -- I wonder why? Something
perturbing must have happened in her life. Was it
unpleasant or pleasing? Either could have made her
unbalanced like this. Perhaps there is no reason... she was
born like this with a peculiar nature ... There seems to be
nothing wrong with her parents. They seem to be pleasant,
calm folk! Who cares about her character! Why is she so
concerned with my affairs and why has she done so much
to help me escape those soldiers from Pazluvoor? She has
also promised to take me to Lanka... is everything some
vast intrigue? No! But why did she change her mind? What
favor does she expect in return from me? She declared that
she would ask me later ... What could it be?
While he was immersed in such thoughts, the forest
around him was filled with turmoil, just as Poonkuzlali had
predicted. Horses galloped, men ran about in pretentious
bravado, small forest creatures screamed in panic and
birds called with fear. All this created a great commotion.
Soon everything quietened into silence. He discerned that
all the noise was in search of him. He thought about the
treachery of the Doctor’s son. Fool! Did he think that he
had fallen in love with Poonkuzlali so quickly? Idiotic, like
the stagnant creek falling in love with a roaring lava flow!
It is like that story of the country mouse that wished to wed
a lioness! How cleverly this girl made use of his

foolishness. What jealous flames has she fanned in his
heart! Within half an hour she turned him into a traitor!
The powers of womenfolk is tremendous!
Vandiya Deva, you must accept one thing: you thought
that you were very clever; you were proud that none is your
equal in cunning and craftiness. But this unsophisticated
country girl has outwitted you. Consider the trick she
employed to bring you, who were swimming in the sea, to
this hidden lair. If she had not run away like that with the
waist-band what would have happened? I would have been
arrested by those soldiers from Pazluvoor. And the whole
mission would have been wasted. I should never be
careless like this again.
The sun sank into the western sea. It was a remarkable
sight in Kodi Karai. The coastline which went southward
suddenly turned at a right-angle to stretch westward.
Therefore, if one viewed from atop a dune in Kodi Karai
they could see the ocean in all three directions: east, west
and south. In some months one could glimpse the full moon
rising from the eastern sea in splendorous light while the
sun sank with fiery glory into the western ocean. Vandiya
Devan felt an eagerness to emerge from the sand dune and
view the sunset. He controlled his desire with much effort.
Darkness came quickly to envelop all directions. The
dim light which dwelled in the hidden lair become pitch
dark. He could not remain there anymore. He came out and
climbed upon the sand dune which covered the pavilion. In
the distance he could see the fire from the lighthouse.
Diamonds shimmered brilliantly in the sky. All sorts of
curious sounds rose from the forest. There was quite a
difference between the daytime noises and these nightsounds of the woods. These mysterious nighttime sounds
created a terror in his heart and a shiver in his limbs. By
daylight, even if one comes face to face with a tiger, reason

overcomes fright; in the night, even if a mouse scrambles
through the underbrush, the heart is gripped by horror!
Here comes the call of a nightingale, "Koo kooo!" It
sounded like divine music in Vandiya Devan’s ears. He
walked towards that sound to find Poonkuzlali standing
there. She signed, "Come with me without making any
sound!" He realized that the sea shore was not too far
away.
The boat was ready on the beach. A mast, sail cloth
and ropes to hoist the sail were placed neatly in the boat.
Two long poles extended outward on one side and a large
flattened wooden log was bound to the ends of those poles.
(Note: It was a catamaran. From the Tamil kattu-maram
meaning bound logs.) Vandiya Devan tried to help her push
the boat the water. "You keep quiet!" she signaled. She
pushed the vessel expertly and it slid into the water silently.
Vandiya Devan tried to climb into the boat. She said in
a soft voice, "Shhh! Wait a little! You can climb in after we
have gone a little further." She dragged the boat behind her
as she waded into the sea. Thinking that he would help,
Vandiya Devan pushed from behind. The boat stopped. "It’s
better if you just come quietly!" said Poonkuzlali. After they
had crossed the wave line she said, "Now you can climb in,"
and jumped into her boat. When Vandiya Devan tried to
leap into it, the boat rocked dangerously. It seemed as if he
would fall back in the water. Somehow, he managed to sit
down. He could hear his heart beating loudly. "Can I talk
now?" he asked.
"You are welcome. If you have stopped shivering, you
can talk!" said Poonkuzlali.
"Shivering? Who is shivering? Nothing like that!"
"Then, it’s alright!"
"Don’t we have to raise the sail?"

"If we raise the sail, those on the shore might be able
to see us. They might catch up with us."
"If they come, I can handle them. You need not worry."
Vandiya Devan started to sing his own praises.
"The wind is blowing shoreward now. If I raise the sail,
it will push us back to the beach. The wind will change
after midnight. A sail might be useful after that."
"Oh! You are well aware of all these things. Perhaps,
that is why your father asked me to take you as my guide."
"My father! Whom do you mean?"
"I meant your father, the light-house keeper Mr. Tyagavidangar."
"He is my father only when I am on the shore. If I am
on the open sea ..."
"What? Would even a father change if you are on the
sea?"
"Yes; here the Ocean King is my father. Didn’t anyone
tell you that my other name is the Ocean Princess?"
"Nobody told me. Why that curious name?"
"Don’t people refer to the younger son of the Emperor
as Ponniyin Selvan, (Ponni’s Beloved)? It is like that!"
On hearing this, Vandiya Devan felt his waist band and
made sure of his waist-pouch. Poonkuzlali noticed his
concern and asked, "It is safe, I hope?"
"What are you asking about?"
"I am talking about that thing you have in your waistpouch."
Vandiya Devan was shocked; a tiny apprehension crept
into his heart. Poonkuzlali was pulling at the oars as she
talked. The boat was gliding forward. "When will we reach
the island of Lanka?" asked Vandiya Devan.

"If two persons row, we can reach by daybreak; if the
wind is on our side."
"I too can pull the oars and help you. I won’t let you
down."
Vandiya Devan picked up the oars on his end and
pulled. Ah! This is not an easy task! It requires much
strength! The boat swirled and stopped completely.
"What is this? When you pull the oars, the boat glides.
If I take up the oars, the boat stops?"
"I am the Ocean Princess. That is why! It is enough if
you can just keep still. I’ll somehow take you to Lanka. Is
that alright?"
He felt a bit ashamed and kept quiet for a while. As he
looked around, he caught sight of the poles and logs
extending from one side of the boat. He asked, "Why these
poles?"
"To keep the boat stable, so that it does not rock too
much."
"Oh! Will the boat rock more than this? Even now it
seems to be dancing and I am beginning to feel queasy."
"You call this rocking! You must see it in rainy season
when the Monsoon Winds blow!"
When viewed from the shore, the sea seemed calm like
a placid silver platter; he realized it was not so. Foamless
waves rose and fell. They rocked the boat like a cradle.
"What happens to these logs when the big wind
blows?"
"Depends on how strong the wind is. Normally these
logs will stabilize the boat and prevent it from overturning.
If a whirlwind blows and the boat capsizes, we can unbind
these logs from the boat. We can float by holding onto these
logs and hope to be rescued."

"Oh dear! Can this boat capsize in a big wind?"
"Even huge sailing ships will break into smithereens if
caught in a whirlwind. What can one say about this tiny
boat?"
"What do you mean by a whirlwind?"
"Don’t you know even that? When the winds blowing
from one direction encounter the gusts blowing from the
opposite direction, a whirlwind takes shape. During the
months of Thai and Maasi (January to March) the Kondal
Breeze blows in these parts. There is nothing to worry
then. We can easily cross between Kodi Karai and Lanka. In
fact, we can go and return in one night. By Vaikasi (MayJune) the Chozla Winds will start. It is a little difficult to go
to Lanka from here on the Chozla Wind. Now it is the
season between the Chozla Winds and Monsoon Winds.
Sometimes, on the open seas, strong winds will encounter
swift gales blowing from the opposite direction. Like a
butter churn swirling milk, the whirlwind will churn the
water. Waves will swell into mountains and fall down. Deep
chasms will be created on these waters. The sea will swirl
into great whirls in those chasms. If a boat is caught in the
midst of all this ... that is the end!"
Suddenly panic filled Vandiya Devan’s heart. A new
doubt arose in his mind. "Oh dear! I won’t come! Take me
back to the shore!" he shouted.
"What are you blabbering about? Keep quiet. Close
your eyes if you are afraid. Perhaps it is better if you go to
sleep!"
His doubt now appeared to be confirmed. "You are a
wicked double-crosser! You have brought me here to drown
me in this sea. You think your task will be easier if I go to
sleep!"
"What nonsense is this?"

"I am not foolish! Are you going to turn back or not? If
you don’t, I’ll jump into the water!"
"You are welcome! But before you jump, give me that
letter you are carrying for Ponniyin Selvan."
"Oh! How did you know about that letter?"
"I came to know about it upon examining your waistpouch! Would I have agreed to take you to Lanka in my
boat without making sure of who you are and why you are
going to Lanka? This morning when I was sitting on the
tree branch, I opened your pouch and examined its
contents..."
"You deceiver! I trusted you and came here! Are you
going to turn back the boat or not?" His fear and doubts
increased tenfold. He began shouting in panic as he stood
up, "Turn back! Turn back!"
"If I had been the Younger Pirati Kundavai Devi, I
would not have sent such an important letter through such
a fickle minded messenger like you!" said Poonkuzlali.
"Oh dear! You even know who sent the letter. There is
no doubt now: you are a double-crosser. Turn back or I will
jump!"
"Jump! You are free to jump!" said Poonkuzlali in
disgust. Fear-crazed Vandiya Devan jumped into the sea
thinking that the water would be shallow like the beach
near the coast. He had not seen that the boat had come far
into the deep ocean. He realized that he could not swim
after he had jumped into the deep water; he began
shouting with fear.
Vandiya Devan knew a little swimming. But his natural
fear of water made his limbs weak. In a lake or river, the
shore within view had given him courage. This was the
open sea; water everywhere, in all directions. The waves
were very mild; still, they lifted him high and pulled him

deep down as they rose and fell. When he rose with the
wave, he could see the boat. "Aahhh!" he shouted,
senseless with fear and doubt. When the wave pulled him
down in a trough, only the high wall of water could be seen.
His tongue lost the sense to even shout for help. By the
third time he was tossed up, the boat appeared to have
moved away. The thought, "This is it! I am going to drown
in this sea!" gripped his mind. Kundavai Devi’s face floated
before his mind. "Oh! What have you done?" asked her
face!
Ah! What dream castles had I built! What fantasies I
had thought up! I had envisioned that I would win back my
ancient Vaanar Kingdom and be crowned on a jeweled
throne with the Younger Pirati seated by my side!
Everything is a waste! This wretched girl has ruined
everything. She is not a girl -- she is a ghoul in female form!
An agent of the Pazluvoor men. No, she is a retainer of that
enchanting sorceress Nandini. It does not matter if I
drown, If only I could catch hold of her ... If only I could
strangle her ... Oh! What foolish thought is this? Why can’t
I think of good things when I am about to die? Let me think
of God! Oh Lord God! Oh, Master of the Universe! Oh, dear
Perumal who reposes on the primeval ocean! Dear
Kundavai Devi! forgive me, I am unable to complete the
assignment you gave me. There goes the boat. If only I
could lay hands on her.....
Poonkuzlali remained indifferent for a few minutes
after Vandiya Devan had jumped into the sea. She felt that
he would somehow manage to keep afloat and climb back
into the boat. Thinking of teasing him she moved the boat
away from him. Soon she realized her mistake: this fellow
does not know how to swim! Moreover, he is gripped by
panic. He is not joking when he shouts for help, "Aaahh!
Ohh!" He is really frightened. Very soon he will start
swallowing salt water and start to drown, and it will be

difficult to even retrieve his body. "Chee! I have made a
mistake; my teasing has turned into disaster. I should have
shut my mouth till we reached land. I should not have
disclosed that I knew his secret ... I was too hasty. But who
knew that this fool would do such a thing?"
When Vandiya Devan was thrown up with the next
wave, she quickly moved the boat close to him. She called,
"Come, come! Get into the boat." But he could not hear her
and he did not seem capable of getting into the boat by
himself. All he was capable of was to lift his head up and
scream in panic, "Aahh!" Poonkuzlali recognized his wails
as the last calls of a drowning human being. In that dim
light of the crescent moon, she could catch a glimpse of his
face. It was the fear crazed face of an idiot. "He will never
swim back and get into the boat! I have to rescue him ...
why did I create this unwanted predicament? I have proved
the truth in the saying `A woman’s mind is a foolish mind!’
What should I do?"
She did several things very rapidly. She pulled up the
ropes meant for binding the sails and tied one end to the
logs extending from the boat. She bound the other end
around her waist and jumped into the water. With quick
easy strokes she swam near him and stopped at arm’s
length. Vandiya Devan had seen her. His face and eyes were
filled with a horrible killer instinct. Poonkuzlali seemed to
know the thoughts of drowning men. If anyone came to
their rescue the drowning man or woman would get hold of
the rescuer in a death grip. The panic of approaching death
would give them elephantine strength. They would get hold
of the rescuer and try to drag them down too! It would be
quite difficult to escape that deathly grip; and it would be
impossible to swim. Both were likely to drown in the
depths!
Such thoughts flashed through Poonkuzlali’s mind at
lightning speed as she came to a decision. She swam closer

to him, approaching from his back as she made a tight fist
with one hand. She punched him hard with her fist. Her
hand, strengthened by several years of rowing boats,
landed like a thunderbolt on his face. His head split into a
thousand pieces as his eyes saw a million slivers of light.
Several million lightning shafts darted before his eyes.
Ocean Princess appeared in each shaft of light, roaring
with ghoulish laughter. The horrible laughter of a million
ghouls deafened his ears. He could neither hear nor see; he
lost control of his senses; endless darkness! Infinite silence!
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 8 -- Ghost Island
The Sky Goddess must be very human by nature!
Humans let the all-pervading light of God escape from the
skies of their hearts; later, they light a million lamps in dark
temples and sanctums in search of that eternal light! The
Sky Goddess was also engaged in such an eternal search
every day! She lets Lord Surya, the sun, the lord of light,
escape from her embrace and sink into the sea. She then
worries about the whereabouts of her chosen lord! She
lights a million lamps to look for him. She fills the skies
with countless, brilliant, lamps and keeps vigil throughout
the night waiting for her lord.

When Vandiya Devan regained
his senses and opened his eyes, he
saw
several
thousand
lights
twinkling
around
him.
He
wondered, which temple is thus
decorated with so many thousands
of oil lamps? He then realized that
they were not temple lamps but
twinkling stars that filled the night
skies in the open sea. He was lying
down, staring into the sky. His
clothes were wet and a rope was
wound around his waist. A soft cool
breeze
caressed
his
body,

comforting him, calming him. The
drone of the tranquil sea gave rise
to an extraordinary peace in his
heart. A song in the midst of that
drone. What song was that? Where
had he heard it before?
... the sea is ever so quiet,
and a breeze crawls ever so softly,
In the heart of this doe-eyed maid,
why does a whirlwind blow?
when wave-filled seas are still,
why does my inner ocean seethe?

Oh, that peculiar girl Poonkuzlali! He sat up and
looked around. Yes, it was her: she was rowing the boat.
She was singing that sad lyric as she pulled the oars. He
remembered all the incidents of the early night in a flash -his struggling and drowning and Poonkuzlali coming
towards him. He could not recall anything after that. The
girl must have rescued him and pulled him into the boat.
She had bound him to the floor board with a rope to
prevent further mishap. She had wound the rough rope
over his waist cloth so that it did not bite into his skin ...
such kindness... He felt for his waist-pouch and made sure
that it was intact with the money and roll of letters. Ah!
How foolish of me to doubt this girl? If her intentions were
not right, she would not have saved my life. She must have
struggled to pull my heavy body into this tiny boat. How did
she manage? What an extraordinary girl she is!
Why is she walking towards me? Did she see that I am
awake? What will she do? No, she is doing something else!
She is raising the mast and unfurling the sail. Such a
skilled task; and she is handling it all by herself!

"Poonkuzlali, Poonkuzlali!"
"Oh! You are awake?"
"Free me from these ropes, I’ll help you."
"It will be a great help if you just keep still. You can
unbind yourself; the rope is just wound around your waist.
But please don’t jump into the sea again."
Vandiya Devan sat up and unwound the rope.
Poonkuzlali straitened the mast; she unfurled the sail cloth
and let it catch the breeze. The boat skimmed on jauntily,
swiftly.
"Ocean Princess!"
"What?"
"I am thirsty."
"You drank the salt water; you will feel thirsty!"
She picked up a gourd and came closer. "I had brought
some food for you. When you jumped, the bag fell into the
sea. Somehow this gourd escaped." Saying this, the Ocean
Princess removed the stopper and gave him the gourd. He
took it and drank the sweet water. Vandiya Devan cleared
his throat and said, "I mistook your intentions. I am sorry."
"It does not matter. Who cares about who you are and
who I am? We are merely acquaintances who will part at
daybreak."
"What time is it now?"
"Look at the sky and estimate it. Look at the Seven
sages (the dipper)," said Poonkuzlali the Ocean Princess.
Vandiya Devan looked at the horizon towards the
north. Since he had embarked from the beach, the Seven
sages had completed half a circle. Look, how the star
Arundhati sticks so close to the star Vasishta! But Dhruva,
the pole-star has not moved from its position. It stays firm

in the horizon where sky and sea meet, for eons and eons,
helping ships and guiding sailors over the years! The pole
star! Someone compared somebody to it... Who? Whom did
they refer to? Yes, I remember ... The Astrologer of
Kudanthai had mentioned it. He had compared the young
Prince Arulmozli Varma to this pole star. Am I really going
to be fortunate enough to meet that Prince? Is this boat-girl
going to help me do so?
Poonkuzlali had gone back to her seat. "Did you find
the time? It is the second half of the third Jaamam (about
2.00 am). The wind has changed and we can reach Snake
Island by sunrise."
"Snake Island?" asked Vandiya Devan with some
dismay.
"Yes. There are several islands along the northern
coast of Lanka. One of those is Snake Island. If you land
there, you need not cross water again. You can walk by a
land bridge to the main island."
"What are you planning to do after you put me on
shore?"
"Why are you bothered about me?" asked Poonkuzlali.
"You have helped me this far. Don’t I have to thank you
properly? You said that you might ask a return favor of me.
What is that?"
"I have changed my mind. I am not going to ask any
favor of you. You are a thankless man."
He felt that her accusation had some truth. Once more
he felt inside his pouch and made sure of the roll of
palmleaf letters. "Ocean Princess! I am ashamed of my
behavior early in the night. I am sorry that I did not trust
you. Forgive me please ..."
"Fine. You too can forget that incident. Think about the
future. What are you planning to do after you reach Lanka?

How do you plan to find the Prince?"
"The good Lord God who helped me cross this sea will
help me in that matter too."
"You seem to have a lot of faith in God. Do you think
that God takes any interest in the affairs of ordinary
mortals like us?"
"I have not contemplated on such deep philosophy. If I
have some trouble or worry, I pray to the good Lord. And
God often gives me timely help. Did not the Lord send you
to row this boat for me?"
"Don’t be so proud and confident. I did not come to
row the boat for you. Neither did God appear in my dream
and order me to help you ...."
"Then why did you help me escape yesterday? Why are
you in this boat now?"
Vandiya Devan was lost in silent thought. An idea
arose in his proud mind. He wondered if the girl had fallen
in love with his brave, charming personality. He gave up
the thought immediately. Her words and actions did not
justify such a thought. There seems to be some other
mysterious reason. I must talk to her and find out. "Yes, I
am a bit concerned when I think about one thing..." he
began.
"What is that? Do you also have worries?"
"People
mountains."

say

that

Lanka

is

full

of

forests

and

"Yes, more than half of Lanka is dense jungle and
mountain forest."
"They say that those forests are full of wild animals."
"Wild elephants roam in herds. Sometimes a rogue
elephant may come out from the forest."

"I heard that the people of Lanka are uncivilized
tribals."
"That is utter falsehood."
"If you say so, it must be correct. I must explore such
forests and find the Prince."
"Just now you said that it will not be too difficult!"
"Yes. I did say that because I thought that there will be
no problem in finding a brilliant sun."
"Why have you changed your mind?"
"Clouds may hide the sun; or it may be hiding under
the sea."
"No cloud or sea can hide this sun. Even the cloud that
tries to eclipse Ponniyin Selvan will become brilliant. The
sea will shimmer with light."
How enthusiastic she becomes when she talks about
the Prince? Just like all the common folk of Chozla lands,
this girl also considers him a divinity. What is that special
attraction, the charisma that Prince Arulmozli possesses?
Vandiya Devan asked, "So, you think that it won’t be
difficult to find the Prince in Lanka?"
"If you enquire about the whereabouts of the Chozla
army and go there, you can automatically find the Prince."
"How? I heard that more than half of Lanka is
occupied by the Chozla army."
"Yes; I too heard that the Chozla army has occupied all
lands from Mattotam to Pulastiya City."
"So? Where would I find the Prince in that vast land? It
may take many days to travel through all those forests and
find the Prince. I have to deliver this letter to him
immediately. You saw the seals on the letter, you know how
urgent it is."

The Ocean Princess did not give any reply, but
remained silent. Vandiya Devan continued to talk, "If I
definitely know the whereabouts of the Prince, I can meet
him without wasted travel."
"There is a way," said Poonkuzlali.
"I was sure of it, that’s why I asked you."
"Remember, I said earlier that I would drop you on
Snake Island?"
"Yes."
"Near Snake Island there is a Ghost Island."
"The very name is frightening."
"Don’t be afraid. In ancient times the island was called
Gautama Buddha’s Island. When Lord Buddha first came to
Lanka, he is said to have landed there. He is said to have
preached a sermon form under a fig tree on that island.
That is why it was called Gautama’s Island."
"In later years the name became corrupt to Ghost’s
Island..."
"Yes. Men like you are scared just by the name Ghost
Island. Normally, no one goes there. Only those who are not
afraid of the ghost go there."
"You mean courageous folk like you who are not afraid
of fire breathing ghouls. What were you about to say?"
"If you can wait for half an hour on the beach of Ghost
Island, I can enquire about the whereabouts of Ponniyin
Selvan."
"Whom will you ask on Ghost Island?"
"A ghost lives on Ghost Island. I will ask that ghost."
Poonkuzlali said this with a smile.
"Can I meet that ghost?"

"That is impossible. You must not follow me into the
island. Only if you promise to wait on the beach near the
boat, will I go in and make enquiries."
"Fine. Do as you wish." Vandiya Devan agreed.
The breeze was pleasant. The sail caught the wind and
the boat skimmed across the waves. The drone of the ocean
continued in the background. Sleep struggled in his eyes.
Slowly he slipped from wakefulness to sleep.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 9 -- "This is Lanka!"
When Vandiya Devan woke again, he was astounded by
the scenes around him. The sun was rising towards the
eastern horizon. The sea shimmered like molten gold in
that direction. Dawn Goddess was scintillating in golden
silks. Ahead, the boat was approaching an emerald isle
veiled by the deep blue sea. Towards his right he could
glimpse another land mass, equally green. He could not
discern if it was an island surrounded by the blue sea or if
it was a larger land mass. In the distance, between both
these emerald wonderlands, he could see several more
islands in various hues of green. As he looked around from
the boat, he glimpsed all the seven colors of the rainbow
and all the seven thousand hues of those various colors. On
the whole, nothing seemed real. Some expert, divine, artist
had declared, "Here, I’ll show you paradise," and painted
some fantastic masterpiece. Vandiya Devan was lost in this
dreamlike beauty when Poonkuzlali’s voice dragged him to
reality. "It is not paradise; this is Lanka!"
"Yes, I wondered if it was paradise," said Vandiya
Devan.
"This is not paradise; but it is a land like paradise.
Devils in human form have been trying for many years, to
turn this heaven into hell!" said Poonkuzlali.
"What do you mean by devils?"
"Men like you; who make war their life’s work."
"Even Ponniyin Selvan?"
"Why do you ask me about him?"
"You promised to make enquiries about the Prince."
"I said that I would find out where he may be. I didn’t
say if I could find out if he was human, demon or God!"

The boat neared the island. The drone of the deep sea
was replaced by soft lapping sounds of waves dashing
against sandy beaches.
"What have you decided? That island in front is Ghost
Island. The land on the right is Snake Island. Where shall I
go? Shall I leave you on Snake Island? Can you find your
way?"
"No; let us go to Ghost Island. Even if there is a delay
it is better to go on after knowing the whereabouts of the
Prince."
"Well, remember your promise."
The boat came ashore on the sandy beach of the tiny
island. After ordering Vandiya Devan to guard the boat, she
walked into the emerald island. He stood gazing at her, as
she disappeared into the trees. For a while he
contemplated about the island and how its name had
changed over the course of time from Gautama Island to
Ghost Island. After that, he thought about the nature of the
ghost which lived on the island now. He then wondered
about the mystery, the secret in the heart of the strange
boat-girl. As promised, Poonkuzlali came back in half an
hour. She got into the boat and ordered him to do the same.
The boat glided towards Snake Island.
"Could you find out anything?"
"I believe that Prime Minister Anirudda Brahmaraya has come to Mattotam to meet Ponniyin Selvan. The
Prince would have arrived in Mattotam last night. It is not
clear how long he is likely to remain there. You can go
there and find out."
"How far is Mattotam from here?"
"About five or six leagues; forest all the way. Don’t
think that it will be like the forest of Kodi Karai. The dense
jungle is full of trees reaching the sky. Some spots will be

pitch dark at mid-day. Elephant herds and wild beasts are
aplenty. Be careful when you go."
"If only I had a smart girl like you to guide me through
this forest...."
"Then where is the need for a messenger like you?
Give me the letter, I can deliver it! Never... I cannot ... I am
crazy! I can never do that. You made a promise to the
Younger Pirati. You finish your assignment."
"It’s alright Poonkuzlali. I can do it myself. Even if you
beg for it, I will not give up the letter. You have already
helped me a great deal. That is enough."
The boat was nearing the shore. Poonkuzlali’s hands
were pulling the oars. But her expression clearly showed
that her heart was wandering in some dream world. When
Vandiya Devan called, "Ocean Princess!" she returned to
earth with a shock.
"What do you want?"
"You said that you expect some return favor from me.
Tell me now, we may not get another chance."
She did not reply for some time. She seemed to be
debating with some conflicting thoughts. He continued to
talk, "You have been a great help. You did not merely help
me; you have been of immense service to this great Chozla
Empire! You have helped the Chozla Emperor and his
family. I will not feel happy unless I repay this debt in some
way."
"Are you saying the truth? Or, like all men, are you
uttering deceitful lies?"
"I promise in the name of this Ocean King."
"Are you saying that your words are written on water,
to be wiped out instantly?"

"I promise in the name of the sky and the earth and
the guardian angels of all the eight directions."
"I do not trust your oaths and promises. How can liars
be bound by oaths they make? The first time I saw you, I
felt that you were a good man. So, I’ll tell you this ..."
"First impressions are always the best. Don’t change
your opinion."
"When you meet Prince Ponniyin Selvan, after giving
the letter, after delivering all the messages, after all the
discussions, after exchanging all the news, when he is
relaxed, ask him this: `Do you remember the Ocean
Princess?’ If he replies, `Yes, I remember!’, tell him, `She
was the one who rowed the boat and brought me to Lanka.’
Tell him that!"
Poonkuzlali! Are you aiming to fly that high? Can a
house-sparrow declare to court the Eagle, the King of the
Skies and try to fly like him? There is no good in this ...
Vandiya Devan wondered about this; but said, "You
hesitated this much just to say this? I thought that you
were about to ask some impossible favor. I will surely tell
him. Even if the Prince does not remember, I will tell him."
"No. You must not tell him anything if he does not
remember."
"Nonsense, I’ll definitely tell him everything."
"What will you say?"
"I will recount everything just the way it happened.
`Prince, Ponniyin Selva! Do you remember the Ocean
Princess? If you don’t, please recall her now. It was she
who saved me from those murdering wretches of Pazluvoor.
It was she, all by herself, who rowed the boat and brought
me safely to Lanka. It was she who saved me from a
drowning death! If it was not for the help of the Ocean
Princess, I could not have been alive to come and meet you.

I could not have delivered these letters and messages to
you.’ That is what I will tell him. Is it alright?"
"So far it is correct. Don’t add anything more to it. And
don’t tell him that I told you to say all this."
"Never! Did you think I was a complete fool?"
"If the Prince says anything in reply, you must come
back and repeat it to me exactly. You must not change a
syllable of what he says."
"Where will I see you again?"
"What is so difficult about finding me? I can be found
at Kodi Karai or on this Ghost Island; or in my boat on the
sea between."
"On my way back home, if I happen to come this way,
shall I look for you on Ghost Island?"
"You must never enter that island for any reason,
whatsoever! It may be dangerous. Look for this boat on the
beach. If it is there, call me with some signal ... do you
remember how I called like a nightingale last night? Can
you call like that?"
"I cannot call like you. But I can scream like a
peacock! Here listen to this..." He covered his face with his
palms and screeched horribly like a peacock! On hearing
that, Poonkuzlali laughed merrily. The boat had neared the
shore. Both disembarked. Vandiya Devan waded onto the
shore and turned back to say farewell. He wished that she
would change her mind and say, "I’ll come with you." But
she was not even looking at him! Her face showed that she
was already lost in her dream world.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 10 -- Honorable Anirudda Brahmaraya
For some time now we have neglected our old
acquaintance, Mr. Azlvar-adiyan Nambi, of the early days of
this story. We beg forgiveness of Mr. Nambi and our
readers for this lapse. It is particularly essential that we
beg forgiveness of Mr. Nambi right now! Azlvar-adiyan is
very angry at present. His top-knot is flying in disarray in
the seaside breeze of Rameswaram. His wooden staff is
swirling in earnest above his head! He is surrounded by
several men of the Saiva faith -- ascetics and novices. We
are slightly concerned about Azlvar-adiyan’s welfare: those
men seem to be quite belligerent. However, Nambi’s rage
filled incarnation and swirling staff reassures us!
Azlvar-adiyan left Pazlayarai the very night he had
overheard the conversation between Princess Kundavai and
Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan. He travelled south as fast as
he could go. On the way, he refrained from entering into
any disputes on the relative merits of Saiva and Vaishnava
faiths. He controlled his instinctive behavior to prevent
any impediment to his mission. He tarried for a few hours
in Madurai City and after confirming some news, left for
Rameswaram, the coastal town. On the very night that
Vandiya Devan set sail for Lanka with Poonkuzlali, Azlvaradiyan had reached Rameswaram.
The very instant he set foot in that holy city, all the
fanatic Vaishnava rage he had bottled up, burst forth in
earnest intensity. The numerous followers of the Saiva faith
who populated the holy city fanned his fanatic zeal even
further. The holy men of that sacred city were prone to take
charge of newcomers and pilgrims, guiding them to the
various hallowed ponds and lakes for a sacred bath, helping
them offer services in the numerous temples and shrines.
Newcomers were often mobbed by such diehard priests

and novices looking for a new client. Azlvar-adiyan was not
spared.
"Dear man! Come, come! Come bathe in all the sixtyfour sacred waters of this city and wash away those sinful
symbols of Vaishnava faith you wear all over your body.
This is the holy city where Lord Rama atoned for his
heinous sins and found salvation. You can also repent for
the sin of having worn these vile namam symbols of the
wretched Vaishnava faith!" spoke a priest with ridicule.
Another intervened, "There are several sacred waters - Rama’s Pool, Lakshmana’s Lake, Hanuman’s Pond. They
had bathed in those waters to make amends for their
various sins! You come with me, I shall first take you to the
Hanuman (monkey) Pool. It is the appropriate place for a
fellow like you!"
A more elderly man spoke up, "Do not listen to these
novices! I shall take you directly to the place where Rama
made an image of Lord Shiva with beach sands and
worshipped Him to atone for the monstrous sin of killing
King Ravana."
Embers of rage sparked in Azlvar-adiyan’s eyes. "Stop
these words of slander immediately. You should all go to
these sacred pools and wash your tongues for uttering such
sinful words."
"Ah! Are you saying that we have sinned because we
uttered the names of Rama and Lakshmana (sacred deities
of Vaishnava faith)? Don’t worry, the name of this very
place is Rameswaram! This is the place where Lord Rama
worshipped Eswara who is none other than Lord Shiva.
Therefore, there is no sin in the name Rama in this holy
city."
"Oh, you ignorant dimwits! Why do you utter such
nonsense? Don’t you even know the real meaning of this
city’s name?"

"Do you know? Can you enlighten us?"
"Because Shiva had plucked one head of Lord Brahma,
he was seized by the sin of killing a brahmin. He had to
come here, to this holy city hallowed by the divine feet of
Lord Rama, the true incarnation of the Great Vishnu, to
pray for forgiveness! This is where Eswara worshipped
Rama! That is why the city is called Rameswaram. Do you
idiots know it now?"
"Hey! Who is this fellow to call us idiots? You
scoundrel! Do you have horns on your head to say such
things about us?"
"No Sir! No. I have no horns, but I do have this
wooden staff in my hand! Do you wish to know who I am?
Listen to this: I am the slave he who serves those who serve
Saint Nammazlvar of Gurukoor who wrote the holy
scriptures in divine Tamil. I am Azlvar-adiyan Nambi who
breaks the pate of morons with my staff!"
"Hey Nambi! Why do you wear a tuft on your
forehead? Why don’t you shave it off like the rest of your
head? The inside will then match the outside of your bald
pate!"
"Yes, I did think of coming to this sacred city and
shaving my head. Thanks for reminding me ..." explained
Azlvar-adiyan.
"Well said fellah! Hey you there! Go to the street of
barbers and fetch him a barber. Tell him to bring an extra
sharp razor. Let us remove the very roots of this lout’s topknot!"
"Why go fetch a barber? We can do this worthwhile
task ourselves! Bring me a sharp knife!"
"Wait! Let me finish! Once upon a time my head was
covered with thick curls. I took an oath that every time I
break the head of a foolish Saiva follower, I would remove

one strand of my beautiful locks. Thus, most of my head is
clean shaven; all that remains is this tuft on my forehead. I
can now shave it off here; come help me. Let me break your
heads!" saying this, he began swirling his staff.
"You are impertinent, young man!" said an elderly
priest. A novice behind him came up saying, "Can you
break all our heads? Are you sure?"
"How do you think that three-fourths of my head is
clean shaven? Come let me show you!"
"Catch him!" "Kill him" "Finish him off!" The crowd
shouted with hostility; but none dared to come in the way
of his swirling staff. Suddenly, their attention was diverted
by the announcements of a herald.
"Emperor Sundara Chozla Paranthaka’s trusted Prime
Minister, Most Honorable Mr. Anirudda Brahma-raya is
announced. Make way! Make way!"
The startled crowd of priests turned away. Azlvaradiyan was startled more than anyone else. He tucked his
wooden staff under his arm and looked around. They had
been disputing in one corner of the outer walls of
Rameswaram Temple. The wall turned a corner towards the
open sea.
The scene around the corner was breathtaking. Huge
sailing ships, large wooden vessels, small yachts, barges,
tug-boats and catamarans filled the harbor as far as the eye
could see. Huge, white, sails flapping in the wind hid
distant, hazy islands in the blue horizon. Nearby was the
sea-canal.
Heralds came first in a row boat. Then came the barge
in which the famous Prime Minister of the Chozla Empire,
Mr. Anirudda Brahma-raya of Anbil Town, was seated with
dignity, surrounded by liveried footmen and guards. He
noticed the fracas beside the temple wall on the shore. He

signaled with his hand and summoned Azlvar-adiyan, who
was standing most innocently in the midst of the crowd,
with folded hands and staff tucked away. Azlvar-adiyan
walked up to the barge and stood on the shore with great
humility.
"Thirumalai! What is this farce?" asked the Prime
Minister.
"Sir! My Teacher! Everything is a divine act of Lord
Kannan, that deceiving actor on this stage called the world!
I am not sure if I can trust my own eyes! Am I dreaming or
is everything one great illusion?" asked Azlvar-adiyan.
"Thirumalai, I thought that you were a devout follower
of the Vaishnava faith. When did you become a philosopher
who calls the world a mere stage?"
"My Teacher! When you, born and raised in the
strictest Vaishnava traditions, adopt the dogma of Saiva
custom, why should I not embrace Advaita philosophy? I
shall change my name and henceforth call myself the slave
of Sri Sankara the Teacher."
"Stop! Patience! Who said that I converted to the Saiva
faith?"
"The symbols dressing your divine body proclaim it
Sir!"
"Oh! Thirumalai, you have not changed at all! You give
too much importance to outward symbols. Does it matter if
the sandal paste on my forehead is drawn vertically or
horizontally?"
(Note: Followers of the Vaishnava faith wore vertical
marks on their foreheads, while those of the Saiva faith
were identified by the horizontal stripes of ash marking
their forehead.)
"Sir, I am an ignorant fool. I do not know what is
important and what is not. Please adopt me and enlighten

me."
"I shall surely do so. Come to my court. See that tiny
island out in the sea? Come to the pavilion on that island."
"Sir! These quarrel-mongers should first let me go."
Azlvar-adiyan pointed to the group of priests standing by
the side.
One of them came forward and spoke, "My Lord! This
fanatic threatened to break our heads. You must punish him
appropriately." All the others began to talk and complain.
"I shall take care of this fellow. You can all disperse for
now," promised the Prime Minister.
They were not satisfied, "Why can’t we punish him
ourselves? We wish to shave his head and wipe away all the
namam marks on his body and throw him into the well to
anoint him ..."
"What did you say?" Azlvar-adiyan jumped with rage
filled eyes.
Mr. Anirudda Brahma-raya interrupted, "Priests, you
cannot handle this ruffian. I shall arrange for that. Please
leave now." He then turned towards his retainers and
ordered, "Eight of you get down and bring this fellow to my
chambers."
Eight footmen jumped down and surrounded Azlvaradiyan Nambi. The barge moved on. Nambi, encircled by
the soldiers, followed. The crowd dispersed commenting on
the rough behavior of the stocky fellow with the top-knot.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 11 -- The Well-known Kaikola
Battalion
Prime Minister Anirudda Brahma-raya held court in
one of the ancient mansions on a tiny island next to the
larger island of Rameswaram. The instruments and symbols
of his office were in evidence. Accountants, writers, clerks,
messengers, haughty guards, and liveried servants waited
for his orders. The Prime Minister entered his court and
seated himself. After a few minutes of contemplation, he
called for his visitors.
Five men entered first. They appeared to be wealthy
merchants. They placed a gem encrusted jewel on a platter
and presented it to the Prime Minister. He accepted
gracefully and ordered, "Enter this into the temple-building
accounts meant for Lady Sembiyan Madevi’s charities." He
then turned to his guests and asked, "Who are you? How
may I help you?"
Their leader spoke, "We have come on behalf of the
Merchant Guild of Five-hundred from Many Nations In a
Thousand Directions."
(Note: Historical records indicate that a wealthy,
merchant guild with this rather long name conducted trade
among the island kingdoms of South-east Asia, Bay of
Bengal, Arabian Sea and South India for several centuries,
under the patronage of Chozla monarchs.)
"I am glad to hear this; how is trade in the Pandiya
Territories?"
"It improves day by day."
"What do the Pandiya people say?"
"The people say that Chozla rule is much better than
Pandiya rule. Particularly, they are full of praise for the

courage and generosity of young Prince Arulmozli. News of
his activities in Lanka has spread in these parts."
"How is trade these days, in the countries of the
South-east Sea?" asked the Prime Minister.
"We lack nothing under the just rule of Emperor
Sundara Chozla. All our ships which sailed last season have
come back with profits. We did not loose even a single
vessel."
"Did you have any problems with pirates?"
"We had no problems this last year. After the Chozla
Navy captured and destroyed their retreat near the island
of Minicoy, we have no fear of pirates on the South Seas."
"Good. What arrangements have you made about the
letter I had sent you?"
"We have followed your orders. We have collected a
thousand sacks of rice, five hundred sacks of sorghum, and
a hundred sacks of thuvar beans for the campaign in Lanka
and brought them to this island. Please make arrangements
for their transport to Lanka."
"Can you not convey them in your ships?"
"We can, if you order it. We are eager to know when
the Lankan war is likely to end."
"Who Knows! Your Guild must have an official
astrologer; why don’t you ask him? Perhaps you can let me
also know!"
"Sir! We ourselves are unable to believe everything
that our astrologer predicts!"
"Ah! What does he say? What is so unbelievable?"
"He says that Prince Arulmozli will embrace victory
wherever he goes. He says that the Chozla Navy lead by
the Prince, would cross all the oceans and capture distant

lands. He says that the Tiger-flag would fly over distant
kingdoms."
"It means good fortune for you merchant-men!"
"Yes; our sea trade will do well. That is what our
astrologer predicts."
"I am very glad. With the grace of the Lord who
reposes in Srirangam, all this may happen. Every month,
till the war in Lanka ends, I suggest that you procure food
supplies just like this. You may leave now."
"As you wish, Sir. Permit us to leave now."
After the representatives of the Guild of Five-hundred
had left, a courtier came up to announce, "The
Commanders of the Well-known Kaikola Battalion are
waiting for an audience."
"Ask them to come in!" ordered the Prime Minister.
Three distinguished men entered. The Goddess of
Bravery seemed to dwell on their countenance. They
seemed very gallant and fearless. Mr. Anirudda Brahmaraya enquired, "Are you from the Sundara Chozla’s Wellknown Kaikola Battalion?"
(Note: Under the Imperial Chozlas, a select group of
specially trained men from the Vellala Community were
organized into a special corps of personal guards by each
ruler. This select company of skilled warriors were known
as the Well-known Kaikola Battalion. Under each monarch
the company incorporated the name of the current ruler in
its name. The battalion often consisted of several divisions
known as `hands’. In modern times, the men of this
community have given up their warrior traditions and are
often engaged as cotton-weavers.)
"Yes sir. But we are ashamed to proclaim our name!"
"Why? Why is that?"

"We have been feeding on the Emperor’s generosity
and wasting our time for the past six months in these
territories."
"How many `hands’ do you have in your battalion?
How many men in each `hand’?"
"We are a company of three `hands’. He is the
Commander of the Right Hand Division. This man
commands the Left Hand Division. I am Commander of the
Middle Hand. Each division consists of two-thousand
trained men. All are wasting time in eating and sleeping!
Our weapons are collecting rust and shoulders are
slouched in sloth. I think we will forget our craft of
warfare."
The Prime Minister smiled as he asked, "Ah! What is
your petition?"
"We request that we be sent to Lanka. We wish to join
the army under the Commander-in-Chief of the South,
Prince Arulmozli, and engage in war."
"Fine. When I return to Tanjavur, I shall obtain the
Emperor’s permission and let you know."
"Sir, what if the war in Lanka is over by then?"
"Do not worry about that! It doesn’t seem as if the war
on that island will end so soon."
"Is the Singhalese army of Lanka so powerful? Send us
there; we can give our men a hand..."
"Why one `hand’? You can extend all your three
`hands’! Does one have to worry about enemy strength if
all divisions of the Well-known Kaikola Battalion are
pitched against them? The Middle Hand will pierce through
the heart of the opposing formation; at the same time the
Right Hand and the Left Hand will converge from the right
and left, like pincers squeezing the enemy formation ..."

"Yes. It was with such a strategy that we overcame the
Pandiya Army and destroyed it. We fought a similar war
with Chera Forces."
"Pandiya and Chera forces fought face-to-face on a
battlefield. You could attack them and conquer them. You
can vanquish enemies only if you can see them."
"Why? Have modern Lankans become illusionists and
tricksters, like the demons of Ravana’s times? Do they hide
behind cloud-cover to attack?"
"Yes, those tricksters have gone into hiding; but they
do not attack. If they come to fight, we would be able to
locate them. The whereabouts of King Mahinda of Lanka
are not known. Neither can we find his army: They have
gone into hiding in the jungles and mountains. Because of
this, there has been no battle in Lanka for the past six
months. What is the point of sending your men also over
there?"
"Prime Minister, Sir! Please send us there. We can
smoke out Mahinda and his men even if they are hidden in
forests and mountain caves; we can find them even if they
have disappeared into the cloud-world. We will force them
to submit to our Prince. If not, we will change our name to
`Battalion of Vellalar Slaves!’"
"Oh no! Don’t take any such oaths now! Who on this
earth is not aware of the valor of the Kaikola Battalion?
After I reach Tanjavur, I will consult the Emperor and send
you orders. Be patient till then. Continue your assignment
as peace keeping forces in these Pandiya Territories."
"Sir, there are no more enemies to be overcome in
these regions. People are happy about the peace and the
end of war. They are once again engaged in their trade,
industry and agriculture. All members of the Pandiya
Dynasty have been annihilated."

"Do not be too sure of that! You think that with the
death of Veera-pandiya, his dynasty has been exterminated.
That is wrong: there are several others who lay claim to the
Pandiya Throne. There are many who conspire in their
cause ..." spoke the Prime Minister with caution.
"Oh! What conspirators? Where are they?"
"You will know when the time comes. The crown jewels
of Pandiya kings -- the ancient pearl-studded diadem, rubyencrusted necklace and diamond studded ceremonial sword
-- are still hidden somewhere in the mountain caves of
Rohana in Lanka. Till we recover these jewels, we cannot
consider Pandiya forces vanquished."
"We look forward to that day: recovery of those crown
jewels; crowning Prince Arulmozli at Madurai with that
diadem and sword ..."
"Dear me! What are you saying?!"
"We are merely repeating the wishes spoken by
citizens and soldiers."
"These are complicated political issues; let us not
discuss it. Let me tell you something else that might make
you happy..."
"We are eager to listen, Sir!"
"Don’t think that war will end after this campaign in
Lanka. Prince Arulmozli plans to embark on a campaign of
conquest in all directions after this war. He intends to
assemble a naval force of a thousand ships and sail to the
kingdoms of the South-eastern Seas: Minicoy, Malaya,
Mayuri, Lamuria, Java, Sri Vijaya, Sumatra. He will conquer
all those lands and go south to seize the Laksadweep
Islands. In the west, Kerala, Kudagu and Kollam will bow to
him. Then he will turn northwards to Vengi, Kalinga,
Rashtrakuta, Chakrakota, Anga, Bangala, Kosala, Gurjara
and Panchala -- he will lead his army against all these

nations of the north. Like Karikala Valava of historical
fame, he will place the Tiger-flag on the snow-capped
Himalayas. These are the plans of our young Commanderin-chief. Therefore, all the brave hearted, hot-blooded,
young men of these Tamil lands will have plenty to do. You
and your men must remain patient," said Prime Minister
Anirudda.
All three Commanders stood up and raised these
cheers, "Long live Emperor Sundara Chozla! Long live
Prince Arulmozli! Long live Prime Minister Anirudda
Brahma-raya! Victory, Victory!"
Finally, one of them calmed himself and said, "Sir, we
have one more concern. You are aware that we are called
`Sundara Chozla’s Well-known Kaikolas.’ We..."
"Yes, your name is well known."
"We and our hand-picked men have sworn on enemy
blood that we will give up our very lives in the service of
Sundara Chozla."
"Yes, that is known too."
"Therefore, we will not serve anyone but the Emperor.
We will not obey orders from any other person."
"That is what I expect."
"Several years ago, our company was part of the huge
army of Pazluvoor stationed near Tanjavur. Because of that
no one should distrust us ..."
"Ah! What are you saying? Who distrusts you?"
"We hear all kinds of rumors from Tanjavur."
"Rumors should neither be believed or repeated."
"Those Velirs of Kodumbalur might try to discredit us."
"They will not; even if they try, no one will heed them."

All three Commanders now spoke one after the other,
"Life is not eternal." "Even the Emperor has to one day
reach the Lord’s feet." "Our Emperor is not keeping good
health." "The comet Dhoomaketu shines over the skies." "If
anything happens to the Emperor, our men wish to join the
guard corps of Prince Arulmozli."
The Prime Minister stopped their tirade decisively, "It
is your duty to obey the Emperor’s orders!"
"And it is your duty, Sir, to keep us informed of those
orders! Please accept the responsibility of keeping us
informed. Permit us to go to Tanjavur and seek an audience
with the Emperor."
"No. It is not timely; you going to the Capital now will
create needless confusion. I shall personally take the
responsibility to voice your concerns to the Emperor. You
need not worry."
"Even as we speak to you, our worries have vanished.
Permit us to leave, Sir!" All three Commanders of the
Kaikola Battalion withdrew from the chamber.
The Prime Minister was lost in thought for some
minutes. His lips murmured, "What is this power of
attraction that Ponniyin Selvan possesses? Even those who
meet him only once become crazy!" He ordered in a louder
voice, "Who goes there? Ask that rough Vaishnava fellow to
come in."
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 12 -- Teacher and Disciple
Azlvar-adiyan entered the chamber of Prime Minister
Anirudda Brahma-raya. He then went around the minister
three times, as if in prayer and bowed with much humility,
genuflecting till he lay prostrate in front of the seat. He
rose uttering the following words loudly: "Om haram
hareem vashattu! Give me permission, O’ Teacher!"
Mr. Anirudda smiled as he said, "Thirumalai, what is
this farce? What permission do you seek?"
"My devotion to the Vaishnava faith, my name Azlvaradiyan which means `slave of saints’ my good fortune of
being in service to you -- all these I wish to sacrifice in this
huge ocean. I would then to convert to the fanatic Saiva
faith of Kalaamukha’s. I would carry a dead man’s skull in
my hand and wander from town-to-town chanting spells like
`Om haram hareem vashattu!’ I shall grow a long beard
and matted locks; I shall break the pate of every faithful
Vaishnava I encounter with this wooden staff of mine!"
"Stop it dear fellow, stop! Will my head also meet the
same fate?"
"Sir, are you still a follower of the Vaishnava faith?"
"Why this doubt, Thirumalai? Who do you think I am?"
"Who are you? That’s what I have a doubt about! Are
you the great-grandson of noble Mr. Anantha of Anbil, who
considered that his only mission in life was to serve Lord
Ranga who reposes between two rivers, in the Temple of
Srirangam?" asked Thirumalai Nambi.
"Yes; I am he!"
"Are you the cherished grandson of Anirudda Bhatta
the priest of Anbil, who spread the greatness of the Lord’s
Name to all the world?"

"Yes, it is me; in fact, I am named in honor of that
great gentleman."
"Are you the beloved, eldest son of Narayana Bhatta
who enchanted the devout with melodious renderings of
saintly lyrics?"
"Yes, yes."
"Are you a son of that best among women, who lit
everlasting lamps to worship the Lord and served nectarlike food on silver platters to pilgrims visiting the temple?"
"I am sure of it."
"Then, my eyes must be deceiving me. Are my eyes
seeing truth? Are my ears hearing truth?"
"What do you mean? What has happened to make you
doubt your own eyes and ears?"
"I heard that you had visited the Shiva Temple in this
town and had offered worship ..."
"That is correct. Your ears did not deceive you."
"My eyes see the symbols of your visit to the Shiva
Temple; that must also be true!"
"Yes, it is."
"Are you not my revered teacher who counselled that
the only God is Lord Narayana, the lyrics of Azlvar Saints
are the only scriptures and the only way to salvation is
chanting of the Lord’s name?"
"Yes; what about that now?"
"You, my teacher, preach one thing and do something
else. What can I, the disciple, do?"
"Thirumalai, are you upset about my worshipping at
the Shiva Temple?"
"Which God did you worship in that Temple?"

"There is nothing to worry about that: it was the Good
Lord Narayana."
"Ah! I had heard that the deity in Rameswaram Temple
was in the form of a Shiva-symbol. That is why all those
fanatic Saiva priests heckled me on the beach!"
"Thirumalai, is it true that you go by the name of
Azlvar-adiyan, which means that you are a slave of Saint
Sadagopa of Nagari?"
"That is very true."
"Do you
Sadagopa?

remember

this

composition

of

Saint

Dear Lord, who embodies Godhead to followers of many faiths;
Those who espouse the name of Shiva, the Jains, the Buddhists, and the
philosophers debating varied causes ...

Why should I not see Narayana in Shiva’s Temple?"
asked Mr. Anirudda Brahma-raya.
"Aha! The divine sayings of Sadagopa are without
equal! See how he equates these fellows of the Saiva faith
with Jains and Buddhists."
"Your sarcasm will never forsake you! Listen to these
next few lines of that same song:
You are the personification of water, of land, of fire,
of time and of space;
Oh Narayana you are twin flames
of the divine fire called Shiva and Hari;
Oh ascetic, Oh supreme spirit, Oh three-eyed Lord who stole my heart;
Oh priceless ruby with nectar-sweet lips and lotus-petal eyes;
Spirit of my lonely life, come shower me with thy divine grace ...

Did you understand Thirumalai? The Saint is calling
Him the three-eyed Lord, asking Him to shower His divine
grace! But you take objection to my visiting a Shiva
Temple."
"My Sire! Forgive me and my mistakes. I have wasted
my time in useless quarrels because I had not studied all

the scriptures properly. And I doubted you! Please grant me
a boon so that I can make amends."
"What boon do you seek; I may consider granting it."
"I wish to take up abode in Gurukoor. I wish to collect
all the thousand lyrics of Nammazlvar Sadagopa and
popularize them in every town and dwelling."
"Why this sudden wish?"
"While returning from Venkatam, I stopped to
worship the Lord at Veera-Narayana-Puram. I recited a few
couplets of Nammazlvar’s hymns in that Vinnagara. The
priest Eswara Munigal of that temple was moved to tears
on hearing my songs."
"Eswara Munigal is a very devout man; very learned."
"The priest’s young son was also listening to my songs.
His young face glowed like the full moon on hearing those
lyrics. When that young lad asked me `Do you know all the
other couplets?’ I felt ashamed to reply that I did not know
all the songs. At that time, I wondered why I should not
devote my life to the service of the saints and their
compositions. Today my intentions have become even more
firm."
"Thirumalai are you not aware of the teachings in `The
Lords Song’? To each his own duty!"
"Yes Sir."
"Great men will be born to spread the teachings of
holy saints and to collect their songs into anthologies. You
and I have accepted political service as our life’s work.
Have you forgotten that we have sworn to expend all our
energies and intellect in the service of the Chozla
Emperor?"
"I have not forgotten, Oh Teacher! But doubts about
that decision often nag my heart. Particularly, after I heard

some gossip about you ..."
"What gossip?"
"They say that you have forgotten all loyalty to
Vaishnava faith because the Emperor has rewarded you
with a land grant of ten villages and confirmed it by a
copper plate edict. You have forsaken your faith in the
king’s service, travelling hither and thither, crossing seas
and nations..."
"You should not heed such jealous gossip. Yes, the
Emperor did reward me with a land grant. But I had
become his Prime Minister many years before that. Do you
not know it?"
Azlvar-adiyan was silent.
"Do you know how the Emperor and I became friends?
We had both studied under the same tutor in our younger
days. We studied the literatures of Tamil and Sanskrit; we
learnt the intricacies of mathematics, logic, astronomy, and
grammar. In those days, no one had an inkling that Sundara
Chozla would become heir to the throne. Neither he nor I
even dreamed that he would become the Emperor. Who
could have known that Arinjaya would be crowned after the
deaths of Raja-aditya and Gandara Aditya? Who would have
thought that Sundara will ascend the throne because of
Arinjaya’s early death? When Sundara Chozla accepted the
empire, he expected several complications. He told me that
he would accept the crown only if I promised to stand by
him, help him govern the disorganized nation. He was
ready to forsake the Chozla throne if I was not willing to
help him. At that time, I promised to help him administer
this vast nation. I have kept my promise to him. I thought
you knew all this?"
"I know all this, Sir! But what is the point in my
knowing it? The people do not know it. The gossips and
courtiers in the city do not know it."

"You need not worry about such people. For a short
time, even I was concerned about giving up my traditional,
priestly duties and entering politics. Since the last two
years, I have no such confusion. Anyway, Thirumalai, I think
you know this: I came here not on a pilgrimage to
Rameswaram, but to visit Mattotam."
"I guessed it, O Teacher!"
"Mattotam on the banks of River Paalavi is just as
beautiful as it was described by Sambanda:
Flower gardens full of humming bees singing symphonies;
Peacocks dance in Mango groves of Mattotam;
It is the abode of Lord Kedeswara, who showers his grace
Upon devout servants, the citizens who worship Him."

"Sir! Did you go to Mattotam to enjoy its scenic
beauty?"
"No. I mentioned it because I intend sending you
there. I went there to meet Arulmozli Varma."
"Did you meet the Prince?" asked Azlvar-adiyan
eagerly. For the first time, his voice reflected a certain
urgency.
"Ah! Even you show an eagerness! Yes Thirumalai, I
met the Prince and talked to him. I was able to personally
confirm the truth in those astonishing tales coming from
Lanka. Listen to this my man! King Mahinda of Lanka had a
huge army. There is no trace of that army now. Do you
know that it disappeared like dewdrops before the rising
sun? Mahinda’s army included several units of Tamils from
the Pandiya and Chera Kingdoms. When those men found
that Arulmozli was the Commander of the Chozla’s, they
dropped their weapons and crossed over to our army. How
could Mahinda fight? He vanished into hiding in the
mountains of Rohana. Thus, our armies have no enemies to
face in battle."

"Well! Then why doesn’t our Prince return to his
homeland with his army? Why does he tarry there? Why all
this conflict about sending food-supplies for our men?"
"We can declare that there are no enemies and come
back. But our Prince does not wish it. Once our army comes
back, Mahinda will emerge from Rohana, and it is war once
again. There is no point in it. We should either confirm the
friendship of Mahinda and his people or make them accept
the rule of our Tiger-flag. Our Prince is trying to achieve
either of these objectives. Do you know what our soldiers
are doing in Lanka? Remember, the whole city of
Anuradhapura was destroyed by the old wars? All the
ancient mansions, palaces, mausoleums, temples, and
spires in that city were ruined. Our men are engaged in
renovating all those structures, by orders of Prince
Arulmozli."
"Fantastic! Do you think that the Prince will give up
both Saiva and Vaishnava faiths and embrace the Buddhist
creed? Will you approve of that also?"
"It does not matter whether you and I approve or not!
Commoners like you and I can squabble saying `our faith is
the best.’ But a king should be patron of all faiths espoused
by all his subjects. Our Prince knows this truth; he follows
it with action when he has the opportunity. Perhaps you
have heard that our Prince has the sign of the conch and
discus on his palms. I have heard it; though I have never
examined his palms to confirm or deny that statement.
Whether he has the sign of the conch and discus or not, I
can assure you of one thing: If anyone on this earth has the
qualification to rule as Absolute Emperor, it is Arulmozli.
Some are born with such divine favor. Did you overhear any
of my conversations with the merchants and Kaikola
Commanders? Those merchants, who are so tight-fisted
about money, become quite amiable upon hearing the name

of Prince Arulmozli. Soldiers are eager to fight under his
leadership!"
Azlvar-adiyan did not reply. The
continued with even more enthusiasm:

Prime

Minister

"Some months ago, I met a seer on the Mountains of
Podigai. Do you know what he said? `If the elephant had its
day, the cat is also likely to have its own day.’ He said, `The
time has come for the glory of our southern lands. For a
long time, the great men of our holy land have appeared in
the north. Prophets and emperors were found north of the
Vindhyas. But an eclipse will soon hide the north. A
barbarian horde will cross the Himalayas and come down
to the plains of the holy Ganges to destroy the very fabric
of northern society. The horde will demolish temples and
destroy our divinities. The very existence of our ancient,
Vedic culture will be in jeopardy. Only the kingdoms of the
south will be able to preserve the glory of our laws,
scriptures, arts, and lifestyle. Brave emperors will arise in
these southern lands. Prophets and learned men will be
born here!’ That is what the seer told me. I now believe
that his predictions will come true."
Thirumalai spoke hesitantly, "Sir! You are building
dream castles! Here, they are trying to topple the very
foundations of this empire. If you had seen all that I had
seen and heard what I have heard, you will not be so
enthusiastic. You will think of the danger surrounding this
Chozla Empire and be filled with distress."
"Yes, Thirumalai! I have been side-tracked by my
enthusiasms. I have not yet heard the details of your
journeys. Tell me; however, horrifying it is, let me hear the
news."
"Sir, would you order me to speak here in this chamber
itself? Even the Wind God would shiver if he hears my
news; the Ocean King would stand still; birds will stop

flying; the sky and the earth would scream in terror on
hearing my news. Do you order me to speak of such things,
openly, here?" asked Azlvar-adiyan Nambi.
"No. I have a secret chamber in an underground cave
on this island, where neither wind nor light can enter. Let
us go there and talk." ***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 13 --Ponni’s Beloved
While Vandiya Devan had landed on Snake Island and
was walking towards Mattotam, while Prime Minister
Anirudda and Thirumalai were engaged in discussions
about the state of the nation, Kundavai and her dear friend
Vanathi were seated in a howdah on an elephant and
travelling towards Tanjavur.
For some years now, the Younger Pirati Kundavai had
made up her mind not to visit Tanjavur. There were several
reasons for this decision.
Tanjavur still did not have
enough palaces or mansions to individually house all the
noblewomen of the Empire. Noblewoman of the Emperor’s
household had to live in the main palace which housed the
Emperor. All the other palaces and mansions inside the fort
had been commandeered by noblemen and officials of the
empire, like the Lords of Pazluvoor. Women of the royal
household could live in unrestricted indulgence in the
Chozla Maaligai at Pazlayarai where they could go and
come as they pleased, doing whatever they fancied. But if
they lived in Tanjavur, they were subject to the protocols
and rules imposed by the Lords of Pazluvoor. In Tanjavur, it
was not easy to exit or enter the palace and fort at one’s
whim and fancy. The Younger Pirati never liked all such
controls and protocols. Moreover, Kundavai loathed
Nandini’s proud and haughty behavior since her becoming
the Young-Queen of Pazluvoor. In addition, the Emperor
preferred that his close family should remain in Pazlayarai.
Because of all these reasons, Kundavai had decided to live
in Pazlayarai. She curbed her eagerness to visit her ailing
father and help her mother in nursing his sickness.
After Vandiya Devan’s visit, her heart underwent a
change. She wondered if she had the right to indulge in the
carefree life of Pazlayarai -- boat races and garden parties,

song, and dance -- when the Empire was facing such threat
and turmoil from conspiracies and treason.
My brothers are far away in Thondai and Lanka. Is it
not my duty to be concerned about the affairs of the nation
when they are not here to look into matters? My brother
Karikala had asked me to periodically send him news,
through confidential, secret messengers, about the
activities in Tanjavur. How can I be aware of things
happening in Tanjavur if I enjoy life at Pazlayarai? The
news brought by Mr. Vandiya Devan is quite alarming. Till
now I disliked the noblemen of Pazluvoor merely because
they wielded power beyond their station. Now they have
started conspiring about the very throne of this Empire.
They have enmeshed that foolish and naive Madurandaka
in their wiles. They seem to have enrolled several chieftains
and officials of this nation to support their cause. Who
knows what can happen? How far will it go, this treachery
and deceit by Lord Pazluvoor? Perhaps my father’s life is in
danger! Who knows if the traitors will spare his life? When
both his sons are far away, if something happens to the
Emperor, these traitors can easily place Madurandaka on
the throne and declare him to be the new ruler. They are
likely to do any heinous deed to achieve their goals. Even if
they do not think such thoughts, that sorceress Nandini will
teach them! She will encourage them even if they hesitate!
Considering all this, it is important that I remain beside my
father in Tanjavur. I can keep track of the intrigues and
plots; I can also guard my father from danger!
Why are these noblemen trying to place inexperienced
Uncle Madurandaka on the throne? Is it because of law and
justice? Never! If Madurandaka is crowned, he would be a
puppet in their hands, fulfilling their every wish and fancy.
Nandini’s word would become law in this Chozla Empire!
Everyone would have to live in fear of her powers. Other
noblewomen must bow to her wishes. Chee! I can never let

that happen. As long as I live that cannot come true! Let
me see how far she goes!
Living in Tanjavur will surely be uncomfortable. My
father and mother will chide, "Why did you come here now?
Why did you give up the comforts of Pazlayarai?" I will
probably have no freedom of movement. Everybody will
begin questioning me about my marriage. I will hate that. I
will have to meet and entertain Nandini. I’ll be unable to
tolerate her haughty display of power. But I should not
consider all these petty problems when such a great danger
threatens this kingdom. I am also afraid for my father’s life.
I must go to Tanjavur.
In addition to all this, there was another important
reason. It was the eagerness to find out if there was any
news about Vandiya Devan. Kundavai knew that Pazluvoor
noblemen had sent their soldiers in pursuit of Vandiya
Devan, knowing that he had gone towards Kodi Karai.
Will that smart and cunning young man be caught by
these soldiers? If arrested, he would be brought to
Tanjavur. It is essential that I am in Tanjavur if something
like that happens! They cannot easily harm a messenger
sent by Crown Prince Aditya Karikala. They will have to
accuse him of some major crime and give him a fair trial.
Ah! That is why they have accused him of attempted
murder, saying Vandiya Devan tried to kill Sambuvaraya’s
son by stabbing on the back. I have no doubt that this
accusation is totally false! But it has to be proved false. It
would be useful if I talk to Sambuvaraya’s son Kandamaran,
and know his mind.
While Kundavai’s heart was confused by such
complications and conspiracies, Vanathi, who rode beside
her on the elephant, was engrossed with quite a different
matter. Her pure, innocent mind had one and only one

thought: Prince Arulmozli Varma! When would he return
from Lanka?
"Akka! You said that you had written asking him to
return immediately. When he returns, where will he come?
To Pazlayarai or Tanjavur?" asked Vanathi.
Vanathi’s concern was this: What if the Prince went to
Pazlayarai while they were in Tanjavur! Kundavai, who had
been thinking of something else turned to her friend and
asked, "Whom are you asking about? Is it about Ponniyin
Selvan?"
"Yes Akka! It’s about him. You have referred to the
Prince as Ponniyin Selvan several times though you never
explained why he has that title. You excused yourself saying
that you would explain later.
Can you explain now?
Tanjavur Fort seems far away and this elephant is walking
like a tortoise!"
Kundavai smiled, "If this elephant walks any faster
than this, we cannot sit on its back. We and the howdah
carrying us will fall to the ground. My Dear! Do you know
what happened in the Battle of Takkolam?"
Vanathi was not ready to be diverted; she said, "Akka!
Tell me the story about the title `Ponniyin Selvan’."
"You rascal! You won’t forget that, will you? Fine,
listen to this tale." Kundavai retold the old story.
In those early years after Sundara Chozla had
ascended the Chozla throne, his family life was filled with
happiness. He would often enjoy excursions with his family
on pleasure cruises on the River Ponni (Cauvery). The royal
barge would be filled with fun and merriment. Music of
veena players and lyrics of the bards would compete with
the lilt of River Cauvery’s flowing currents. Practical jokes
and pantomimes would provoke mirthful laughter. The
elders would pass hours in family discussions and chit-chat.
Children would have great fun on the deck. Sometimes

elders and children would gather together to enjoy the
festivities.
On one such day, when the Emperor embarked on a
boating trip with his queen and children, suddenly a cry
arose, "Where is the baby? Where is the baby?" It was
Kundavai’s voice. At that time Arulmozli was barely five
years old and Kundavai was just past seven. Arulmozli was
the cherished darling of everyone in the palace. More than
anyone else, his elder sister was fond of him. It was
Kundavai who first noticed that the child was not on the
barge. Everyone was stunned. They searched all over -- in
the cabin and below deck. The servants ran hither and
thither. It was not a large boat -- where else could they
search? Kundavai and Karikala began crying. The queen
was in tears. Footmen had already jumped into the water,
looking for the baby Prince. Sundara Chozla had also
jumped into the river, swimming across the currents,
looking for his dear son. Where could they look? The
current was swift; how far could the child have gone? Did
anyone remember when the child had fallen into the water?
Did he really fall into the river?
They searched aimlessly and could not find the child.
Maids on the barge fainted. Their desperate wails, "Aai
Oh!" drowned the lilt of Cauvery’s floods. Even songbirds
on the shore became quiet.
Suddenly, an astonishing vision appeared. It was in the
middle of the river, a little beyond the royal barge. A female
form was wading in the floods holding a child in her arms,
raising him high above the water level. Sundara Chozla was
the first to see her. He swam across and reached for his
son. Soon, the servants took charge of the child and helped
their monarch back on board the barge. As soon as the
Emperor climbed back on deck, he fell down in a swoon.
Everybody became engrossed in comforting the child and
reviving the Emperor. No one noticed the woman who had

saved the little Prince. None had seen her clearly to give a
proper description. No one came forward to claim a
reward saying, "I saved the child."
They unanimously decided that the River Goddess,
Mother Cauvery, must have taken human form to save the
darling Prince. The royal household made arrangements to
worship Goddess Cauvery or River Ponni on that day every
year. They believed that the cherished son of the palace
was also the beloved child of River Ponni. From that day
onwards, Arulmozli was known as `Ponniyin Selvan’ -Beloved of River Ponni.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 14 --Two Full Moons
Tanjavur City was filled with the hustle and bustle of
excitement. Why shouldn’t the citizens of the capital be
happy? After a long time, their beloved Princess had
changed her mind and honored them with a visit. There
was not a soul in the land who had not heard of Princess
Kundavai’s beauty, intelligence, culture, and generosity.
Her name was on the minds of the people every day, on
some pretext or other. Their eagerness had been further
kindled by rumors that the Princess would be in Tanjavur to
participate in that year’s Navaratri celebrations, the nineday festival of arts. When it was announced that the
Princess would be arriving that day, a very ocean of people
had gathered outside the fortress walls to welcome her.
Just like the ocean in full tide reaching for the full moon,
this sea of people rippled with excitement.
Soon, the full moon rose in the sky: Indeed, two full
moons appeared at the same time! When Kundavai Devi
and her retinue approached, the massive doors of Tanjavur
Fort were thrown open with a thunderous roar. Palace
guards emerged from inside, to welcome the royal Princess
and escort her into the capital. The two Lords of Pazluvoor
were at the head of this entourage; in addition, behind
them came an ivory palanquin embellished with pearls. Its
screens parted to reveal the beautiful, enchanting face of
Pazluvoor’s Young-Queen, Nandini Devi.
Both ladies descended, Kundavai from the elephant
and Nandini from her palanquin. Nandini walked up quickly
with greetings welcoming the Princess. Kundavai
acknowledged her welcome with a gracious smile. When
they saw these two famous beauties of the Chozla Empire
side by side, the massive crowd cheered with enthusiasm
that broke bounds.

Nandini had a golden hued body; Kundavai had the
coloring of a soft pink-lotus. Nandini’s golden face was
round, like the shining full moon of summer. Kundavai’s
divine face was slightly elongated, like that of an exquisite
bronze statue, cast by a master sculptor. Nandini’s jet black
eyes, slightly reddened at the corners, were large: like fat,
buzzing bees. Kundavai’s blue-black eyes were elongated,
almost touching her ears, like the curved petals of a bluelily. Nandini’s short nose, slightly flattened, was smooth -carved out of ivory. Kundavai’s nose was dainty like the
long buds of some fragrant creeper. Nandini’s slightly thick
lips were coral-red shells filled with intoxicating liquor.
Kundavai’s slender lips oozed honey like delicate
pomegranate buds. Nandini had bound her tresses into
bunches decorated with fragrant flowers while Kundavai’s
curls were piled high on her head, like a crown
proclaiming, "She is the Queen of Beauty!"
Of course, the people did not distinguish each feature
of the two women like this, to compliment them; but they
were generally aware that both were incomparable
beauties though differing quite markedly from each other.
Until that day, womenfolk of the city were slightly
dissatisfied, even jealous of Nandini. Every one of them had
a fondness for Kundavai, as if she were a family deity. That
Nandini had emerged from the fort to welcome their
beloved Younger Pirati Kundavai, made them happier.
While the citizens raised cheers to express their happiness,
the conversation between Kundavai and Nandini was like
lightning strike against lightning.
"Welcome My Lady! Welcome! We had wondered if you
had completely forgotten us. Only now are we aware that
the Younger Pirati’s generosity knows no bounds," spoke
Nandini.

"What is this, O’ Queen? Does living at a distance
mean that one has forgotten? Can I assume that you have
forgotten me because you have not come back to
Pazlayarai?" replied Kundavai.
"Honey bees would automatically find fragrant flowers;
they need no invitation. Everyone will visit beautiful
Pazlayarai City. It is your kindness that has made you visit
this ugly, ungainly Tanjavur Fort."
"How can you say that? How can you say that Tanjavur
is ugly? When beauty itself is imprisoned here?" Kundavai
said with sarcasm.
"That is what I hear; that the Emperor was like one
imprisoned in this fort. Now there is no cause for concern,
for you have come to free him..." lightning flashed in her
eyes as Nandini spoke these words.
"Fantastic! Even Gods in heaven cannot imprison
Emperor Sundara Chozla. How can mere mortals,
commoners, do so? I did not mean him ... I refer to the
Goddess of Beauty, Nandini Devi ..."
"Well said My Lady! Well said! Please repeat it so that
My Lord can hear it. Lord Pazluvoor keeps me here in this
city, like a prisoner. If you could speak on my behalf and
recommend that I ..."
"Why do you need my recommendation? You are not in
any ordinary prison; you are a prisoner of love. That too,
the love of an..."
"Yes Princess! If an old man’s love becomes a prison,
there is no escape. Some people talk of `Tanjavur’s
Dungeons.’ Perhaps one could escape from those
underground dungeons. But ..."
"Very true, Young-Queen, very true! Particularly, if the
shackles are of one’s own seeking; if the prison is of one’s
own choosing; escape is difficult. Chaste maids following

the tradition of women like Sita, Kannagi, Savithri and
Nalayini will not even seek freedom! Umh! What is all this
commotion about?" asked Kundavai Pirati.
Yes; there was truly a huge big roar from among the
groups of women gathered outside the fortress gates.
Kundavai and Nandini walked towards that group. The
women called loudly speaking all at once; nothing was clear
at first. It was obvious very soon: they wished to come and
meet the Princess freely at the Palace. They wished that the
restrictions about entering and leaving the fort should be
removed for the nine days of the Navaratri Festival so that
they could seek audience with their favorite princess while
she was in Tanjavur.
Kundavai turned to Nandini and said, "Young-Queen,
why don’t you submit their petition to your husband, or
even your brother-in-law and recommend that it be
granted? Why should there be such strict regulations about
these womenfolk? What danger can befall this Empire
because of these simple folk? Isn’t the power of the
Pazluvoor brothers well known in all directions, up to every
coast?"
"Ah! Why have you stopped with the sea coast? Their
powers extend even beyond the seas. There will be proof of
that very soon." Nandini’s smile pierced Kundavai’s heart
like a poisoned spear. The Princess wondered, what could
be the real meaning of this wicked witch’s words?
By now, Nandini had gestured and summoned the
Elder Lord Pazluvoor to come closer. She explained about
the petition by the women and the Younger Pirati’s wishes.
"Who can say anything against the wishes of the
Younger Pirati?" said the Elder Lord of Pazluvoor. With the
cheering crowds following in procession, they entered
Tanjavur Fort.

For the next few days, Tanjavur was immersed in
endless festivity. It was especially great that the Navaratri
Festival coincided with Kundavai’s visit. Lord Pazluvoor
kept his promise. Commoners were permitted to enter and
leave the fort without any restrictions for the nine days of
the festival. The fortress gates were left wide open day and
night. Several celebrations and competitions were held in
the fort and palace as well as in the townships around the
city. People assembled in large crowds to enjoy all these
entertainments. Two full moons rose often, in the midst of
this sea of celebration. People cheered and the city was
filled with a carnival spirit. But the hearts of both the full
moons were erupting like volcanoes spitting fiery lava.
There was constant competition and strife between the
Young-Queen of Pazluvoor and the Younger Pirati. Their
fierce duels were fought with arrow-sharp words and eyes
that darted like lances. Flames rose when the caustic-sharp
swords of this duel clashed. Venomous lances of words and
action created havoc. Two flashes of lightning clashed on a
storm cloud and wreaked havoc on each other. Two
tigresses, possessed of vicious beauty, wrestled with each
other with sharpened claws drawing blood. Two King
Cobras of horrifying beauty, raised their hoods in a
frightening dance, their thin red tongues darting, trying to
swallow each other. They had a passionate elation in this
bizarre conflict; and also, an all suffering, heart rending,
anguish.
Only one soul suffered in the midst of this conflict
between two powers. Vanathi of Kodumbalur could neither
understand them nor freely participate in the festivities in
the city. Vanathi found it difficult even to get a chance to
talk to Kundavai these days. She dressed well and went
everywhere, attending all the ceremonies with her friend.
But her heart was not touched by anything that happened

outside. She created a secret dream-world of her own and
wandered silently in it.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 15 --An Anguished Call At Night
In those days, the arts of song and dance were well
developed in the Chozla Country. Dance and drama had
grown together. Tanjavur was particularly famous for
nurturing several famous theatricals and actors. Karur
Devar, a Saiva ascetic who lived in those times has written
several descriptions of Tanjavur city surrounded by the
massive fort.
Young beauties, cocky like full blown peacocks,
Arched brows flash like lightning;
They practice dance and step across the theater stage,
In Tanjavur surrounded by the great fort.

Several established play-houses flourished in Tanjavur,
attesting the popularity of theatricals and plays. The most
famous play-house was within the palace enclosure of the
Emperor. Imaginative writers who created new and popular
plays lived in the city. It had been the tradition to portray
stories from myths and religious fables in the form of plays
and dances. For some time now, the players had turned
their attention to a different kind of story. They had begun
to write plays about historical figures, and famous heroes
of the battlefield. The incidents of recent history, the brave
deeds of the previous generation were very popular
subjects of these modern plays. Stories of the Chozla
warriors -- Karikala Valava, Vijayala the Brave, Paranthaka
the First -- were the most popular subjects.
During the Navaratri celebrations, a historical play
about the brave history of Chozla Kings was enacted for
three days in the Emperor’s Playhouse within the palace.
The exquisitely constructed stage, embellished with curious
decorations was located in front of a large open-courtyard
which could comfortably seat more than a thousand
persons. A separate enclosure to seat the noblewomen from
the palace, was constructed towards one side; it was
covered with a silken canopy and equipped with soft

cushions and decorated pillars. Queens and Princesses,
noblewomen and their maids could sit in comfort and enjoy
the plays.
Often during these performances, Nandini came to sit
beside Kundavai. Many of the other women disliked this;
but they hid their resentment and could do nothing about
it. Who could dare say anything against the all-powerful
Elder Lord Pazluvoor and his favorite Young-Queen
Nandini? When Kundavai herself allowed it, what could
anyone else do?
Of the three plays about the history of Chozla
monarchs, the third, which told the story of Paranthaka was
the best. There was some disturbance among the audience
which viewed the play on the third day.
Among the Chozla’s who ruled from Tanjavur, Sundara
Chozla’s grandfather, Parakesari Paranthaka the First, was
famous for his bravery. He had ruled for more than forty-six
years. The Chozla Empire had grown extensive, covering
most of the Tamil Lands, from Lanka to the shores of River
Tungabadra, during his rule. He had fought several
victorious battles. He bore the title, `Ko-parakesari varma,
the valiant who had taken Madurai and Lanka.’ He
acquired fame as the monarch who covered the tower of
Chidambaram Temple with gold. Towards the end of his
lifetime, he faced some setbacks; the Empire shrunk
somewhat in size. But his bravery and fame were not
forgotten.
He fought one last great battle at Thakkolam, against
Kannara-deva the Rashtrakuta King who came from the
north with a huge army. Paranthaka destroyed the huge
invading army. But Crown Prince Raja-aditya who was the
Commander-in-chief of the defending forces, lost his life in
the battlefield as he fought seated on an elephant. Raja
Aditya’s body, pierced with enemy arrows, was brought

back to the palace in the capital. Queens embraced the
dead-body of the valiant Prince who gave up his life to
protect the borders of his beloved country, and shed
uncontrollable tears. Finally, a voice from the skies, an
oracle, spoke: "Don’t weep! Don’t weep! Sorrow not, you
mortals! The Prince is not dead, for he lives in the heart of
every man and woman of this brave Chozla nation." The
play concluded with this final scene.
The audience immensely enjoyed this play depicting
the incidents in the life of the generation before theirs. The
cause for disturbance was this: Two chieftains, minor kings
of the region, helped King Paranthaka in his exploits. They
were the chieftain of Kodumbalur domains and the
chieftain of Pazluvoor principality. Both noblemen were
bound to the Chozla monarch by blood ties and marriage
alliances. Both helped Paranthaka like two extra hands in
his exploits. Neither was greater or lesser than the other.
Paranthaka favored them equally, treating them like two
eyes, honoring them equally. How could one eye be more
favored than the other? The Elder-uncle of the present-day
Lords of Pazluvoor was the Pazluvoor chieftain of those
times. His name was Kandan-amudan Pazluvoor-arayar.
The father of the Younger Lord Velir who lost his life in
Lanka was Irrukkuvel Ilango Velir the chieftain of
Kodumbalur in those days (i.e., Vanathi’s grandfather).
The actors who presented the Paranthaka Play were
careful in their portrayal of both these famous chieftains.
They did not give more prominence to one or the other.
They depicted the great characteristics and contributions
of both noblemen equally. They were particular in pointing
out that Emperor Paranthaka had honored both nobles
equally. But the viewers who watched the play were not
equally enthusiastic in their favors. Very soon it was
obvious that some were fans of the Kodumbalur party and
others favored the Pazluvoor faction. When the scene

showed the bravery and exploits of the Kodumbalur man on
the stage, one group in the audience cheered; when the
Pazluvoor man came on stage another group raised
applause. In the beginning this rivalry was mild. Later, it
grew more hostile. Both, factions raised loud cheers and
shouts, "Naavalo Naaval!" ("Naavalo Naaval" was the
cheering cry of those days.)
This rivalry in the cheering crowd exhilarated Princess
Kundavai. When the cheers from the Kodumbalur faction
was loudest, she would turn to Lady Vanathi seated by her
side and say, "Look Vanathi, your party is winning now!"
Innocent Vanathi would smile happily. Kundavai would look
at Nandini when the Pazluvoor faction was cheering, and
say, "Young-Queen, your side is winning now!" However,
Nandini’s expression betrayed that this did not make her
happy. Nandini’s rage was kindled and made worse by
everything: -- the very occurrence of such rivalry, people
cheering and shouting openly about it, Kundavai
encouraging such behavior, Kundavai equating that
ordinary youngster Vanathi with herself and teasing them
about it, -- none of these made her feel comfortable.
Nandini wondered if she should leave the pavilion in anger.
But that would mean her acceptance of the incidence as
something of importance, even conceding defeat. She bit
her tongue and crunched her teeth to sit quietly till the
end.
Kundavai noticed everything. The expressions dancing
on Nandini’s face were crystal clear, like reflections on a
mirror. Except one thing, `This is a mystery which is
unclear!’ mumbled Kundavai to herself. One scene in the
play depicted the following incident: The Pandiya King lost
the battle and sought asylum with the Lankan King. When
the Lankan King did not come forth with the expected
support and help, Pandiya left his diadem and other crown
jewels with the Lankans for safe-keeping and escaped to

the Chera Kingdom. Everybody in the audience expressed
equal elation at the end of this scene. Though, all factions
applauded, Nandini’s face showed extreme anguish and
sorrow. This was the mystery that Kundavai could not
understand.
Kundavai tried to pry Nandini’s thoughts, "What a pity
that the Emperor could not be with us to enjoy this
wonderful play! In his time, even my father had
accomplished similar brave deeds like my greatgrandfather. If only my father was in good health..."
"He will surely recover. You, his beloved daughter,
have come to his bedside. The Emperor will surely be cured
when the medicines from Lanka arrive." Nandini spoke
softly.
"Medicines
Kundavai.

from

Lanka?

What

is

that?"

asked

"You ask as if you do not know! I believe the Doctor
form Pazlayarai has sent a man to collect medicinal plants.
In fact, I heard that you had assigned a retainer for the job.
Isn’t that true?"
Kundavai bit her lip. She had beautiful teeth like
jasmine buds, but the bitten lip felt pain. Huge cries of
"Naavalo Naaval!" interrupted the conversation.
With a final cheer of praise for the greatness and
health of Sundara Chozla, the play came to an end. The
crowd dispersed with happy thoughts. Noblemen and their
women departed with their retinues. The Empress
Vanamadevi and some other womenfolk of the palace made
preparations to go to the Temple of Durga Nisumba-sudini,
the family deity of the Chozlas.
Vanamadevi had
undertaken several vows, penances and prayers hoping for
the recovery of her husband. She visited the Durga Temple
often to offer prayers. The Temple had special mid-night
services and programs during all nine days of Navaratri

Festival. Special animal sacrifices had been arranged and
the Empress attended the mid-night service without fail.
Most of the other women in the palace accompanied her.
It was not the practice to allow young maidens to
attend services at the Durga Temple. Sacrifices were often
frightening. The officiating priests would often become
possessed of spirits and start dancing frightfully. They
would retell gory tales of destruction and mayhem in honor
of the Goddess of Destruction. Young girls were not taken
to such shows because they would be frightened. But who
had the courage to tell the Younger Pirati, "You will be
frightened, don’t come!" Who could stop her? Kundavai
went with her mother to the Temple on all nine nights and
offered prayers for her father’s well-being. Vanathi was left
alone in the big palace during such times.
On that night of the Paranthaka Play, Vanathi’s heart
brimmed with happiness. She was filled with pride on
seeing the greatness and bravery of her clansmen depicted
on stage. And she did not forget Lanka. Thoughts about her
father who had lost his life on that island and the young
Prince who was there to avenge her father’s death filled
her mind constantly. She could not sleep wanting to stay
awake till the Younger Pirati returned from the temple. "I
must discuss the incidents of today’s play with her before I
can sleep." She felt like going for a walk on the upper
terraces of the palace instead of lying awake uselessly. The
panorama of Tanjavur in the night can be seen from the
terrace. Perhaps even the Durga Temple will be visible. She
rose from her bed with such thoughts. Vanathi was new to
that palace, but she was confident of finding her way
through all the twisting hallways and courts. All the rooms
were brightly lit with everlasting lamps and burning
torches.
The passage turned and turned again. Galleries
seemed never ending. Several oil lamps which had

brightened the early night had now been turned off.
Servant maids and others were lost in sleep in the corners
and alcoves. Footmen had gone for the day. Vanathi felt shy
to awaken any of the maids to ask the way. She wandered
here and there and was soon lost in the never-ending
hallways and balconies.
Suddenly a voice could be heard. It was a wailing,
sorrow-filled voice. Vanathi was frightened and began
shivering. She stood rooted to the spot. Again, that
anguished cry.
"Is there no one to help me?"
Ah! This sounds like the Emperor’s voice! What danger
is this? Is it some pain of ill health? Or, is it something
else? The Empress and all the other elders have gone to the
temple ... What can I do? Somebody must be there, by his
bedside ... He wouldn’t be left alone ... let me see. She took
a few steps further into that balcony. Cautiously she moved
further. The voice came from down below. She looked down
on a large, wide, chamber. Isn’t this the bed-chamber of the
Emperor? Yes; there he is, lying on his bed! All alone! He is
moaning and wailing. What is he saying?
"You wretch! It is true, it is true that I killed you. I did
not intend it; but I am the cause for your death. What can I
do about that now? It is more than twenty-five years now
and why do you still haunt me? Don’t you have any peace?
Won’t you leave me in peace? Tell me, how I can atone ...
I’ll surely do it! Let me be free ... Oh! Let go! Is there no
one to free me from her clutches? Why are you all treating
me with medicines for my physical illness? Is there no one
to treat this mental illness of mine? Help me .... Go! Go
away! No! Don’t move, stop! Tell me what I must do. Tell
me how I can make amends. Why do you kill me like this
with your silence? Can you not speak? Say something
before you go ..."

These words fell into Vanathi’s ears like molten lead.
She shivered from head to toe. Quite unaware of herself,
she looked around. Her eyes looked into all the nooks of the
chamber, behind every curtain and pillar.
A figure stood before the Emperor, a little away,
towards one side, in the shadows of a large pillar. A female
-- half visible, half hidden by shadows and the smoke from
the incense burner. It seems like ... Oh dear! It seems like
the Young-Queen of Pazluvoor? Am I dreaming? Am I
insane? What is happening? No, this is no dream ... Look
carefully, who is that hidden behind that pillar? The Elder
Lord Pazluvoor! I’m not mistaken, it is them! Is the
Emperor crying in fear on seeing her? What is the meaning
of his cry, `It is true that I killed you!’
Suddenly, Vanathi felt faint; her head began to swim.
No, the whole palace was swirling... Chee, chee! I should
not faint now, not here at least ... She moved away with
difficulty and turned into the passage. The return path
seemed endless ... I cannot find my bedroom; I cannot go
on ... not another step ...
When Kundavai returned from the temple with her
maids, she found Vanathi, senseless like a wooden log, in a
passage-way close to her bed-chamber.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 16 --Sundara Chozla’s
Hallucination
Sundara Chozla summoned his daughter to his
bedside. He ordered the servants, nurses, doctors -everybody to leave them alone. He made his daughter sit
close beside him, holding her palms in his hand. Kundavai
realized that he was trying to say something, unable to put
his thoughts into words.
"Father, are you angry with me?" she asked.
Tears glistened in his eyes. "Why should I be angry
with you, my dear?"
"I disobeyed your orders and came to Tanjavur."
"Yes; you shouldn’t have disobeyed me to come here.
This palace in Tanjavur is not good for young girls. You
should realize that from what happened last night."
"What happened last night, Father?"
"I am talking about that girl from Kodumbalur; her
falling down in a faint. How is she feeling now?"
"She is fine today, Father! She used to faint like this,
very often, in Pazlayarai. She will be all right within a few
hours."
"Did you talk to her, my dear? Did she say that she saw
something, heard something?"
Kundavai thought for some minutes. Finally, "Yes
Father! I believe she tried to go up to the terrace when we
had all gone to the temple. At that time, she heard someone
wailing piteously. I believe she was frightened by those
cries."
"That’s what I thought! Don’t you know it now, my
darling? There is a ghost, a phantom wandering in this
palace. You shouldn’t remain here; leave immediately."

When he said these words, Sundara Chozla was shivering
from head to toe; his eyes were craze filled, looking into the
distance. Kundavai noticed all this.
"Father, then why should you stay here? Why should
my mother live here? Let us all go back to Pazlayarai. I
don’t see any improvement in your health since you came
here."
The Emperor smiled sadly, "How can I get better now?
I have no such wish anymore."
"Why should you feel dejected like this, Father? The
Doctor of Pazlayarai says that he can cure your illness."
"And you believed him; you have even sent a man to
Lanka to collect medicines for me. Yes, dear; I heard that!
It shows your love for me!"
"Is there anything wrong in a daughter loving her
father?"
"Nothing. I am fortunate to have such an affectionate
child. There is nothing wrong in your sending a man to
Lanka to collect medicinal plants. But it does not matter if
medicines come from Lanka, if herbs come from Java or
even if ambrosia comes from the heavens; I am not going to
feel better in this birth."
"Oh dear! Don’t say such words, Father!"
"You came here my dear, disobeying my orders!
Actually, I am happy about it. It has been my intention for
some time now, to open the secrets of my heart and tell you
the truth. This is the right opportunity for that. Listen to
this: if it is a physical ailment, medicinal herbs may be able
to cure it. My illness is not merely physical; what cure is
there for a mental worry?"
"Father! You are the Emperor of the three worlds.
What worries can torment you?"

"My child! You talk like the bards -- with wild
imagination. I am no ruler of three worlds! I am not even
Emperor of this one whole world. A small portion of a small
corner in the world is my kingdom. I am unable to bear
even this burden."
"Why should you, Father? Are there not other capable
subordinates to bear the burden of ruling this Kingdom?
You have two exquisite sons. Two lion cubs; bravest among
men; who could bear any burden ..."
"Daughter! It is that thought that frightens me. Your
brothers are both incomparable warriors. I raised them
with fondness, just as I raised you. However, I doubt if I am
doing a good deed if I leave this Kingdom to them. Do you
think it is right to bequeath a curse along with the
Kingdom?"
"What curse can this Kingdom have? Sibi who gave his
own flesh to save a dove and Manu who gave up his own
son for the calf, are our ancestors. Karikala Valava and
Perunar Killi had ruled this Kingdom. Brave Vijayala of the
many battle-wounds sat on this throne. Aditya who raised
one hundred and eight temples along the Cauvery and
Paranthaka who gilded the temple at Chidambaram,
created this Empire. Gandara Aditya the devout ruled this
divine Empire. What curse can this Kingdom have? Father!
You are hallucinating about something. If you leave this fort
..."
"Ah! You do not know what will happen the instant I
leave this fort. Do you think that I am happy to forsake
beautiful Pazlayarai and live in this prison like fortress of
Tanjavur? Kundavai, I am preventing the destruction and
ruin of this ancient Kingdom by living here. Think of what
happened last night, in the playhouse. I was watching
everything from the terrace. At one point I even wondered
if I should order the play stopped."

"Father, what is this? It was a very good play! I was
proud to see the presentation of our clan’s greatness. Why
did you wish to stop it? Which act displeased you?"
"Oh, there was nothing wrong with the play. I am
talking about the behavior of those who watched the play.
Did you not notice the rivalry in cheering by the
Kodumbalur faction and Pazluvoor faction?"
"I noticed, Father."
"They behave in this fashion even when I am here.
Think of what can happen if I were not here. The minute I
leave Tanjavur, both parties will plunge into fights. Like
that myth about Lord Krishna’s clansmen destroying each
other by infighting, these fellows will kill each other and, in
the process, destroy this Kingdom."
"Father, you are the all-powerful monarch of this
Empire. Both, the nobles of Pazluvoor as well as
Kodumbalur, are duty bound to obey your commands. If
they cross the bounds, they seek their own destruction.
Why should you be concerned?"
"My Daughter! Both their clans have given exceptional
service to our family for the past hundred years. This
Empire could not have grown to such strength without
their help. If they are destroyed, it is a weakness to our
Kingdom."
"Father, if it became known that among those two
clans, one was committing treason, by instigating a
conspiracy against you..." Kundavai spoke hesitantly.
Sundara Chozla looked at her with surprise, "What are
you saying, Daughter? Treason and conspiracy against me?
Who is instigating it?"
"Father, some who pretend devout service to you are
secretly conspiring against you. They scheme to declare

that your sons are not eligible to ascend this throne; they
plan in secret to crown another..."
"Who? Crown whom? Whom are they trying to crown
by declaring that your brothers are not eligible?" Sundara
Chozla asked with some agitation.
Kundavai spoke softly, "Uncle Madurandaka, Father.
They plan this treason when you are on your sickbed like
this."
Sundara Chozla sat up a little, "Ah! If only their efforts
are successful!"
Kundavai was shocked, "What is this, Father? Are you
enemy to your own sons?"
"No; I am no enemy to my sons! I wish them well; they
do not need this curse ridden Empire. If only Madurandaka
agrees..."
"Why shouldn’t Uncle Madurandaka agree? He is very
willing; ready to be crowned tomorrow if needed! Will you
accept that? Should you not consult my brother the Crown
Prince?"
"Yes; we must talk with Aditya Karikala. Not only that,
we must make your Elder-grandmother agree to this."
"Will a mother disagree if her son is to be crowned?"
"Why not? You have lived with your Elder-grandmother
for so long; don’t you know her? It was because Lady
Sembiyan Madevi insisted, that I accepted the throne in
those days. Kundavai, your grandmother has great affection
for you. You must talk to her and convince her to accept the
throne for Madurandaka."
Kundavai was too stunned to say anything. The
Emperor continued to speak, "Go to Kanchi after that. Tell
your brother, `You don’t need this cursed Kingdom.’ Make

him refuse this burden. We will crown Madurandaka and be
free of the curse."
"Father, you keep mentioning a curse. What curse?"
asked Kundavai.
"My dear! They talk about previous births; do you
believe in that? They say that one can sometimes remember
the incidents of one’s previous births; do you think it is
possible?"
"Father, those are deep philosophical matters. What
can I say about them?"
"They talk about the ten incarnations of Lord Vishnu.
They tell tales about the previous births of Gautama
Buddha. Don’t you know those enchanting Jataka tales?"
"I have heard those stories, Father."
"When Gods and Prophets have such previous births,
why not us mortals?"
"Maybe possible, that we too have many births."
"Sometimes, I can remember my previous birth. I have
not talked about that to anyone till now. If I do, none will
believe me; or understand. They will declare that along
with physical disability, I am also mentally unwell. In
addition to these doctors bothering me, sorcerers and
exorcists will start coming in here."
"Yes Father. Even now, some say that. You will not be
cured by medicine but you need to be treated by exorcists."
"See! But you won’t think so, will you? You won’t laugh
at me, when you hear my story; will you?" asked the
Emperor.
"Dear Father! Do you have to ask me? Don’t I know
how hurt you feel? Will I ever laugh at you?" Tears filled
her eyes as Kundavai spoke these words.

"I know you well my dear. That is why I plan to tell you
secrets that I have not shared with anyone. Let me tell you
some incidents of my previous birth."
It was a beautiful island surrounded by the sea. It was
full of green palms swaying gracefully. Open areas were
covered by thick bushes and creepers. A youth hid behind a
bush on the beach. He was staring at a huge sailing ship,
moving towards the horizon. He waited till the ship
disappeared from sight. He stood up with a sigh, "I am
safe!"
He was born in a royal family. He had no rights to any
kingdom; neither did he wish it. There were three brothers
elder to his father -- they had precedence. He did not even
dream about ruling that kingdom. He went with an army
which sailed across the sea to fight a battle. He had been
given command of a small battalion. But his army lost that
war; countless men died; most men under his command
had died. He was ready to give up his own life, as he
performed various deeds of valor in the field. But death did
not embrace him. The remaining army of retreating men
gathered on the beach. They made preparations to sail
back to their homeland. The youth did not like to go back.
He was not keen on going home after he had lost all his
men on the battlefield. His clansmen were famous for their
bravery; he did not wish to disgrace their name by his
deeds.
While the ship was sailing, when he saw a tiny island
in the distance, he jumped into the sea. None saw him. He
was able to swim to the beach and hide behind the bushes.
He waited till the ship had sailed away and came out of
hiding. He sat on a low tree branch and surveyed the land
around. It seemed deserted; but he did not care. The island
was beautiful. He was happy to lean back and loose his
thoughts in dreams of the future.

Suddenly, a human voice, a female cry was heard. He
turned around: a young girl was running as she screamed.
A hideous bear was chasing her. The distance between the
bear and the girl was quickly decreasing. There was no
time to think about anything else. He jumped down to pick
up the knife he had brought. The bear was about to place
its fangs on the girl’s shoulder. He took aim and threw the
knife; it struck the bear. The beast turned with a deafening
roar. The girl was safe; he was in danger now. The wounded
bear pounced on him. Man and beast began to wrestle.
Finally, he won.
The victorious youth looked around in all directions.
The girl stood behind a coconut palm, leaning on its bent
trunk with folded arms. She seemed surprised, happy. Her
appearance, her clothes proclaimed that she was a girl of
the forest, unaware of the civilized world. In beauty, she
was beyond comparison to anyone on earth. The way she
stood, leaning on the swaying palm -- it appeared like a fine
painting by a master artist. He wondered if she could be
human! As he stepped closer, she did not disappear like
some nymph. Unexpectedly, she began running, very
swiftly. He tried to follow her for a while; but he was too
tired and he knew that he could not catch up with the girl
who had pranced away like a deer. Moreover, it was not
very civilized to run behind some unknown girl. "She must
live somewhere on this tiny island. I am sure to meet her
again." He walked down to the beach and rested.
Soon the girl returned. She brought an older man with
her. The newcomer said that he was a fisherman of the
Karaiyar tribe, living on the coastal islands of Lanka. An
important truth also became obvious. The girl had saved
the young man’s life! A bear was stalking him as he rested
on the tree branch. The girl had seen them. The bear,
perhaps trying to protect its territory was about to pounce
on him. The girl had distracted the beast by her cries. The

youth was very grateful. He expressed his thanks to her in
many words. But her only reply was silence. The older man
replied to all the questions posed by the youth. This
surprised him; but truth dawned on him soon.
The girl was a speechless mute; neither could she hear
anything. His heart brimmed with pity. A sudden affection
for her rose in him. The circumstance, the surroundings
were conducive for the growth of that affection. Her
inability to speak or hear were no obstacles. Her eyes
spoke of countless inner secrets, of a thousand fantasies. Is
there any language in this whole world comparable to the
sweetness of those talking eyes? Why bother about other
senses when two hearts became one?
The island became a paradise to that youth. Days,
months perhaps even years went by. He forgot to keep
track. One day, there was an end to this life in heaven. A
ship came to anchor on the coast of that island. Several
boats were lowered and many men came on shore. The
young man went down to the beach to see who they were.
They had come in search of him. Many unexpected
incidents had occurred in his homeland. Two elder brothers
to his father had died. The other brother had no children. A
large kingdom awaited him.
The youth was filled with confusion. He had no heart
to leave that beautiful island or that enchanting girl. But an
eagerness to meet his near and dear ones, to step on his
beloved homeland -- new emotions tugged at his heart. He
was told that danger surrounded his homeland on all sides.
War drums sounded everywhere. He made up his mind. "I
will come back; I will fulfill my duty and come back!" he
promised a thousand times. That island girl, the deaf-mute
maiden refused to step in the midst of the newcomers from
civilization. When the youth climbed into the boat, she was
leaning on that old coconut palm, staring at him with tear
filled eyes. He steadied himself and left.

"Kundavai, the sight of that Karaiyar girl gazing at me
with tear laden eyes, it never left my memory. However, I
try, I can never forget it. But another scene more poignant,
in fact a frightening picture appears before my eyes
constantly. In the night and day, in sleep and wakefulness,
it worries me. Shall I tell you about that also?" asked
Emperor Sundara Chozla.
The Younger Pirati spoke with a voice choked with
emotion, "Tell me, Dear Father!"
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 17 --Can The Dead Return?
Sundara Chozla had been speaking as if he was
narrating the story of some third person. Now, he began
telling it like a history of his own life.
"My dear Daughter, today I am telling you things about
which a father will not normally speak to his own daughter.
I am telling you secrets which I have not shared with
anyone. In this whole world, only my friend Anirudda
knows these things; even he does not know all. He does not
know this turmoil that rages in my heart. But I shall tell you
everything. Someone in our family should know everything
-- I do not have the courage to speak of such things with
your mother and I cannot speak about it to your brothers. I
had been intending to tell you all this for some time now.
Today, I have the opportunity, the courage to tell you
everything. You would not laugh about my situation; you
will try to soothe the wounds in my heart; you will help me
fulfil my wishes. I speak to you with such hopes ...
"I left that island on the ship and came to Kodi Karai. I
heard that my grandfather, Emperor Paranthaka was now
living in this Tanjavur palace and came here. When I came
to Tanjavur, the Emperor was on his deathbed. The Empire
he had built over a span of forty years was now facing ruin
and chaos. Raja-aditya the Crown Prince had died in the
battle fields of Thakkolam. My father Arinjaya had been
very badly wounded in that same battle; they were not sure
if he would live too long. Kannara-deva’s Rashtrakuta
armies had already captured our Thondai Territories and
were quickly advancing towards the south. Rebel Pandiya’s
were already regrouping in the far south. Chozla armies in
Lanka had faced defeat and come back. Many brave men
of the Chozla nation had lost their lives in these various
wars. Such news, coming from all directions, had

devastated the aging Emperor. In such a situation, when he
saw me, his face brightened with happiness.
"My grandfather had been very fond of me from my
childhood days. For a long time, he had raised me
personally in his own palace; I was closer to him than to my
own parents. He had permitted me to command the
battalion sent to Lanka because I had been insistent. He
was heartbroken when he found that I had not been one
among the men who returned. Since none could confirm my
death, he had been sending search parties looking for me.
One such search party had found me. His wounded heart
found some peace when I came back to Tanjavur.
"For some reason, he had a hope that the Chozla
Kingdom which faced such devastation towards the end of
his rule, would once again achieve greatness because of
me. Palace astrologers had fostered that hope. As if to
prove the point, though my grandfather had four sons, only
I, his grandson, now remained to carry on the
responsibility. Emperor Paranthaka called me to his bedside
and embraced me with kisses and tears. `My dear Child!
After me, your Elder-uncle Gandara Aditya will sit on this
throne. After him, this Chozla Empire is yours. Our clan is
sure to regain its greatness during your times!’ He spoke
such words for a while. He made me promise that my only
aim in life should be to establish the greatness of the
Chozla people.
"I reciprocated my grandfather’s affection for me with
equal fondness and reverence. I promised to fulfil his
wishes, his orders, as my life’s mission. But I had no peace
of mind. What about the fate of that mute-maiden of the
Karaiyar tribe who had saved me from the bear? How can a
mute, island girl, of the lower classes, sit on the noble
throne of the Chozla Kingdom, as a queen? Will a palace
life be to her liking? Will the citizens and countrymen mock
me? ... Such thoughts confused me. There was another

matter: - My Elder-uncle Gandara Aditya had remarried
recently. You know that the fortunate maiden who married
him is your Elder-grandmother Sembiyan Madevi, the scion
of the Mazlava-raya clan. His first wife had no children;
but what was the assurance that his new wife would not
have any offspring? If my uncle had a male child, how
would I inherit the Kingdom? -- Such questions were raised
by many, even in those days. Perhaps that great soul, my
Uncle Gandara Aditya, felt that none in the Kingdom should
raise any such doubts. Gandara Aditya was coronated after
Emperor Paranthaka’s death. My uncle -- the new King -made arrangements that I should be anointed as the new
Crown Prince on that same day.
"My dear Daughter! You know how the people of this
country are obsessively fond of your brother Arulmozli in
these days. Similarly, in those days, people were
excessively fond of me. During the coronation ceremonies
inside the palace, thousands of people had gathered in the
plaza outside. They waited patiently for the newly crowned
King and Prince to appear before them. Bowing to their
wishes, my uncle and I, stepped onto the viewing gallery of
this palace, presenting ourselves to the crowds. It was an
ocean of smiling faces below us. On seeing us, they raised a
cheering roar. So many people are happy about my being
their Prince; why should I worry about a mute-girl living in
the forests of some desert island? Is the happiness of these
thousands important? -- or the life of a mute?
"I was looking into the happy faces of the people below
me, with such thoughts racing through my mind. Men,
women, the elderly and the youth, even children -- everyone
seemed so happy. However, suddenly, I saw a face -- the
face of a young girl, filled with sadness, eyes brimming with
tears looking at me piteously. I do not know how her face
attracted my eyes or my attention in the midst of that vast
multitude. After that, my eyes never left her face. Her face

became larger and larger; came closer and closer. That
huge horde of people vanished; everybody standing by my
side disappeared; the palace vanished; the decorated
gateway and plaza, the viewing gallery, the city, the
fortress, the sky and the earth -- everything vanished. Only
her face was fixed before my eyes -- like the vision of a
Goddess. I felt faint; my legs felt weak; I lost
consciousness....
"Later, I heard that I had fainted and the soldiers by
my side had prevented my fall. They thought that I had
been tired out by the coronation ceremonies. They canceled
the public appearances and took me to my bed-chamber in
the palace. When I had recovered somewhat, I called for
my friend Anirudda and spoke to him in privacy. I described
what I had seen. I ordered that he should make
arrangements to somehow find that mute-girl and bring her
to me. Anirudda came back later in the night to inform me
that he could not find any girl meeting my description,
though he had searched every nook and cranny of Tanjavur
Fort and its surroundings. I was angry with him, `If you
cannot help me even in this, what kind of a friend are you?
Look for her on all the roads leaving Tanjavur. The coast
road to Kodi Karai ...’ Men were sent to look for her along
all roads. The men sent to Kodi Karai came back with some
news. They had found a mute-girl living in the house of the
light-house keeper. She had appeared to be insane. Though
they had tried by several signs and actions they could not
communicate with her. They were unable to convince her to
go back to Tanjavur with them.
"When the men brought this news, I was stunned and
confused. What should I do? Two days passed in such
confusion. I thought of her day and night. Nights were
sleepless. I left for Kodi Karai with Anirudda by my side. We
rode as fast as horses could carry us. During that journey,
my mental disquiet increased a thousand-fold. What should

I do with her, if I find that mute girl? Shall I take her to
Tanjavur and Pazlayarai and declare, `She is my Queen!’
My heart and body shrank with mortification upon that very
thought.
"My darling Daughter! In those days I was recipient of
an unwanted fame -- that I was incomparable in physical
beauty and allure. I did not heed it much, but everyone
talked constantly about my attractive personality. They
completely ignored my given name -- Paranthaka, in honor
of my grandfather -- and called me Sundara Chozla, the
Handsome Chozla. I, who was famous in this fashion, how
could I, lead an uncivilized island girl into the palace? If
not, what could I do with her? With such an agitated mind I
reached Kodi Karai.
"That good woman solved all my problems. The news
that awaited me at Kodi Karai was shocking. She had
climbed to the top of the light-house on the day after my
men had left. It was the night of a new-moon. Storm winds
were blowing; the sea in high tide was turbulent as it
raised high waves covering the rocks around the lighthouse. That girl stood for hours, gazing into the stormy sea.
People were used to seeing her stand like that quite often;
so, they did not particularly bother about it. A loud cry rose
above the roar of the waves. She vanished. A couple of
fishermen on the beach had seen a woman fall from the
light-house into the sea below. They searched the rocky
shore with catamarans and boats but could not find
anything. They decided that she had been claimed by the
sea.
"This news filled me with pain and anguish; soon a
peace overtook those emotions. I did not have to worry
about what to do with her. I did not have to think about her
... I returned to Tanjavur with this strange feeling, a
mixture of sadness and peace. I became involved with the

affairs of the Kingdom. I married... your mother ... had
brave sons, and you ....
"But! my dear, I could not forget that wretch who died.
Sometimes, nightmares of that scene -- a sight I had not
seen, would torture me. My imagination recreated that
horror of a girl with disheveled hair falling headfirst into
the stormy sea, from the light-house high above. I would
awaken screaming from nightmares about that scene. Your
mother by my side would ask, `What is it? What is it?’ I
never told her the truth. `Nothing!’ I would convince her. I
would pretend to have remembered some horror of the
battlefield. In some years, by the grace of passing time,
those nightmares left me. She faded from my memory. I had
forgotten her till recently. Yet, I think the dead are more
cruel than the living. That mute-girl’s ghost has not
forgotten me. It has begun to appear once again to torment
me! Daughter, do you believe that the dead can return?"
Sundara Chozla, stopped with this question to his daughter.
He was staring into the distance, with a deranged
look. There was nothing to stare at in that chamber! But his
whole body shivered. Kundavai felt an immense sadness for
her father. Her eyes filled with tears. She moved closer and
buried her face on her father’s chest, shedding tears. Soon,
he stopped shivering and caressed her head with his
fingers.
Kundavai sat up and said firmly, "Father, you had
buried these frightening details in your heart for all these
years and were worried sick. Now that you have told me
everything, you will soon feel better."
Sundara Chozla smiled on hearing this. His sad voice
was mingled with a hopelessness, "Kundavai, you don’t
believe me! You don’t think that the dead can return. But I
tell you that I saw it with mine own eyes -- her ghost stood
there, next to that pillar behind the metal-lamp, last night...

How can I not believe it? If I was imagining things, what
about your friend? She fainted because she saw something,
heard something. Call her now, Kundavai! I’ll ask her
myself!" Sundara Chozla spoke restlessly.
"Father! Vanathi is a timid girl. I do not know how she
came to be born in the brave Velir clan of Kodumbalur!
Even if she had seen a pillar in the darkness, she would
have fainted in fright. There is no point in asking her. She
wouldn’t have seen anything or heard anything."
"You think so? Fine, forget her then. Listen to the rest
of my story. I too had no belief in the return of the dead. At
least, not for a long time. I was sure that such apparitions
are merely figments of the imagination. Do you remember
that incident of long ago? When we had all gone boating on
the Cauvery and Arulmozli had fallen into the river when he
was a child? When we had been shocked with distress, a
woman had rescued the child from the river. She vanished
after others had taken charge of the boy. We have talked
about that incident many times; you could not have
forgotten. Your mother and others decided that Goddess
Cauvery had saved the child. But do you know what I saw?
That Karaiyar girl -- the mute -- had picked up the child.
You might remember that I had fainted on that day also.
Everyone thought that I had fainted because of the mishap
to the child. That is not true! I am telling you after all these
years -- I fainted because I knew that it was her ghost that
had picked up the child....
"My Daughter! Do you remember the Coronation Day
of your brother? Do you recall that day, when Aditya
Karikala came into the palace courtyard to receive the
blessings of all our elders, after he had been crowned? I
was by his side then. I saw the mute-girl’s ghost stand
amidst all those women and stare angrily at my son
Karikala. I fainted on that occasion too. When I thought
about it later, I had my own doubts. I worried about why

her ghost should stare angrily at Karikala. I wondered if it
was part of my imagination. Kundavai, now, in Tanjavur all
my doubts are clear. Once upon a time, when she was alive,
I could read all her thoughts just by looking at her face. A
tremble on her lips would tell me everything she wished. I
have that skill once again! Kundavai! She has come before
me four or five times at mid-night, to warn me... `You killed
me! That I forgive. But do not sin again! Don’t covet a
Kingdom which belongs to another and give it to your own!’
I understand this message of hers very well! Daughter! You
must help me in this matter. My sons do not need this
cursed Kingdom, this Chozla Throne! Let us give it to
Madurandaka."
Kundavai stopped his tirade with these words, "Father,
how can you say these things? Why should we change a
decision approved by all the citizenry and nobility? Will the
world agree even if you wish to change it?"
"I do not care whether the world approves or not! I
must follow the law of justice. It is my duty! My mind was
never at peace when I crowned myself as Prince and later
King of this Empire. My conscience pricked me. It is not
lawful that I, the son of a younger brother should ascend
the throne when a son of the elder brother is alive. Now, I
suffer for such sins. Why should my sons commit a similar
sin? Neither Aditya nor Arulmozli need this Kingdom. They
do not need the curse that comes with this Kingdom. We
must crown Madurandaka before I die. After crowning him,
I shall go to live in peace in the Golden Palace which
Karikala has built at Kanchi."
"Father! Will the Elder Pirati agree to this scheme?"
"Kundavai, that is where I need your help. Make up
some reason or other and make my aunt come here. Oh
dear! Why is she who is so knowledgeable about so many
things, unaware of the legality in this matter? Why did she

force me to commit this sin? Why is she angry with her own
son like this? Why is she so adamant about this affair which
is against the very nature of motherhood? Perhaps there
was some justice as long as Madurandaka was involved in
his devotions to Saiva faith declaring that he would become
an acetic. Now that he himself is interested in ruling this
Kingdom, how can we crown anyone else?"
"He may wish to rule; but is he capable?"
"Why not? How can a son born to the great
philosopher Gandara Aditya and a scion of brave Mazlavarayas not be capable?"
"Forget the capability! Shouldn’t the people approve?"
"If we were to ask approval of the people, do you know
what they will say? They will insist that we immediately
crown your younger brother Arulmozli! Is that lawful? Will
Arulmozli agree to any such nonsense? All this is wasteful
argument dear Daughter! Ask your Elder-grandmother to
come here as quickly as possible. Write to her saying that I
am wrestling with the God of Death; tell her that she must
come immediately if she wants to see me alive..."
"That is not necessary Father! The Elder Pirati has
been intending to start renovation of the Tali-kulattar
Temple in Tanjavur. I’ll mention that and write to her,
asking her to come here immediately. Please be patient till
she comes."
After this, father and daughter talked for a while.
Kundavai then left for her chambers. On the way, she
accosted her mother and said, "Amma! From now, do not be
away from my father’s bedside even for one moment! Let
others worry about prayers and penances. Your duty is to
be by his side!"
Certain doubts that had been worrying Kundavai were
now clearer. A twinkle of light began to appear in pitch

darkness. Her intellect warned her that some huge
conspiracy fueled by sorcery and cunning, was taking
shape against her brothers and their rights. But she was
not sure about the details of that conspiracy, who was
really behind it or how it was being organized. She knew
that the Chozla Kingdom and her brothers who had rights
to that Kingdom, were in danger. She was convinced that
the responsibility of protecting them from such danger had
fallen on her shoulders.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 18 --Which Is The Worst Betrayal?

Those who have read the history
of ancient Tamils will be aware that
in those days, womenfolk were in
the forefront of social life. Women
of the royal family were greatly
honored. Women born in the Chozla
family and women who married
into the clan had rights to have
property in their own name.
Noblewomen of those times often
held title to villages, wetlands and
drylands, cattle and other wealth.
It is interesting to read how these
women
utilized
their
wealth.
Several noblewomen, established
trusts and grants in their names for
renovation and maintenance of
temples, public water-tanks etc.
Women established trusts for
public
service
activities
like
lighting of temple lamps, flower

services at places of worship,
feeding of the poor and travelers,
maintaining rest-houses in pilgrim
centers etc. Such grants were
recorded by deeds and edicts
engraved on copper-plates or
carved on stone.
(Note: Land ownership in those days was usually
confined to the nobility, wealthy landowning castes,
community organizations, temples, and trade guilds. Stone
inscriptions were often embedded on temple walls or other
public buildings and memorials.)
Usually, women of the royal household were involved
with temple building and temple renovation projects.
Kundavai Pirati utilized her wealth in a slightly different
manner. Perhaps she was moved by the long-time illness of
her father -- anyway, she undertook the establishment of
free medical facilities all over the Kingdom. She had
already established an infirmary in the name of Emperor
Paranthaka at Pazlayarai. She was now involved in
founding a trust to run an infirmary in the name of her
father at Tanjavur. A ceremony to inaugurate the freehospital and engrave the edicts and grant deeds was
organized on the tenth day of the Navaratri Festival.
Inauguration ceremonies for the `Sundara Chozla
Infirmary’ were organized in the Garuda Pavilion opposite
the Vinnagara Temple in the suburbs outside Tanjavur Fort.
She had chosen a location by the Garuda Pavilion for the
new infirmary, because of the belief that Lord Vishnu of the

Vinnagara was a God of Protection and Garuda the Eagle
was the divine messenger who brought healing nectar.
People from Tanjavur and surrounding villages were
gathered together in large numbers for the program. Men
and women, children and elderly -- all were well dressed in
good clothes and ornaments as they came together in a
joyous assembly. The Emperor’s confidential ministers,
senior and junior officers of the government, stone masons
skilled in carving stone inscriptions, engravers experienced
in the art of writing on copper-plates, palace officials,
members of various guilds, accountants -- all such persons
were gathered in large numbers. A contingent of the
Velaikara Battalion came with members playing loudly on
drums, cymbals and trumpets. Another large contingent
representing Tanjavur’s Guard Corps came with flashing
spears and lances. Both Lords of Pazluvoor came riding
with dignity on two large elephants. Prince Madurandaka
came riding uncomfortably on a smart, richly caparisoned,
white-horse.
Princess Kundavai, her friends, and some elderly
ladies from the palace came in their palanquins.
Pazluvoor’s Young-Queen Nandini Devi came from another
direction in her richly embellished, ivory palanquin
emblazoned with the palmtree emblem of Pazluvoor. A
silken canopy shaded the enclosure reserved for the nobles
and royalty. Kundavai, Nandini and others walked up to sit
in the enclosure.
The ceremony commenced upon a signal from Elder
Lord Pazluvoor. First, two professional singers came up to
sing the Thevaram hymn which began with the words
"Ashes that are healing talismans." People were
mesmerized into silence as they listened to the melody of
the beautiful lyric being sung to the accompaniment of
lutes and drums. But a murmur of conversation could be

heard in the midst of the noblewomen seated under the
silken canopy.
Nandini moved closer to Kundavai as she asked softly,
"Princess! It is said that long ago Saint Sambanda sang this
hymn and anointed the Pandiya King with holy ashes to
cure the ailing monarch. Why doesn’t this song have such
healing powers these days? Forget the song, even holy
ashes don’t seem to have any healing powers! We are not
able to manage in these days without medicines, herbs,
doctors and hospitals. Why?"
"Very true, Young-Queen! In those days justice
prevailed; and hymns had healing powers. These days, the
world is full of vice and sinners -- The country abounds with
traitors who conspire against the Emperor. We never heard
of such people in those ancient times! Perhaps that is why
the powers of chants and talismans have decreased."
Kundavai peered into the face of Pazluvoor’s Young-Queen.
Nandini’s face showed no change. "Is that so? Are
there traitors who conspire against their kings in these
days? Who are they?" she asked calmly.
"That is what I am not sure about! Some accuse one
person; others point at somebody else. I intend to remain
here for some more time till I find out the truth. In
Pazlayarai we never get proper news of what happens in
the world!" Kundavai also spoke calmly.
"A good decision My Lady! If you ask me, I would
suggest that you take up permanent residence here at
Tanjavur. Otherwise, the Empire will fall into ruin! I shall
also help you as much as I can. Also, we have a guest in our
house; he also may be able to help you." Nandini spoke
with a slight sarcasm.
"Who is the guest?" asked Kundavai.

"Kandamaran; Kadamboor Sambuvaraya’s son. Have
you met him? He is tall, like a coconut palm and well built!
He keeps babbling constantly about `spies’ and `traitors.’
You mentioned about treason just now; can you say what is
worse than betrayal of one’s king?"
"Sure. If a woman betrays the husband who took her
hand in wedlock, it is worse than treason!" Kundavai once
again peered into Nandini’s face after saying these words.
But there was no expected change. Nandini continued with
the same enchanting smile.
"You are of course correct; but Kandamaran will not
agree! He will declare that `The vilest sin is betrayal of
friendship!’ I believe that Kandamaran’s best friend not
only changed to become a spy but also stabbed him on his
back before running away. Since that incident, Kandamaran
has been babbling like this."
"Who is he? Who committed such a vile deed?" asked
Kundavai.
(Note: The code of chivalry in those days said that men
of equal strength would fight face to face with equal
weapons. Attacking below the belt or from behind were not
considered as proper. Being killed in battle was considered
a mark of bravery. War wounds -- particularly on the chest
and shoulders -- were borne proudly as marks of honor and
bravery. Wounds on the back were signs of dishonor or
marks of a coward who may have been running away from
an enemy. Wounding another on his back was a cowardly
deed, for the enemy was perhaps attacked without
warning.)
"Apparently it is someone named Vandiya Devan! I
believe he is from the Vaanar clan which ruled long ago
from Thiru-Vallam in the Thondai Territories. Have you
heard of him?"

Kundavai bit her coral lips with pearly teeth, "The
name seems familiar .... what happened after that?"
"What can happen? After stabbing Kandamaran on the
back, his friend escaped. My brother-in-law has sent men to
arrest that spy!"
"How are they sure that he is a spy?"
"How will I know if he is a spy or not? All that we know
is what Sambuvaraya’s son says. Perhaps you would like to
talk to him personally and know all the details, would you?"
"Yes; I must meet Sambuvaraya’s son. I heard that it is
a miracle that he survived! Is he in the Pazluvoor mansion
since then?"
"Yes. They brought him to my mansion the day after he
was wounded. The responsibility of arranging medical care
for him fell on me! Somehow he survived; his wound has
not healed completely."
"I am surprised that he is not fully cured, with you at
his bedside, nursing him! That’s fine. I shall pay him a visit.
Sambuvaraya’s family is no new upstart clan. They are
noblemen, well known for their bravery since the times of
Emperor Paranthaka."
Nandini replied, "That’s why I mentioned it to you.
Perhaps you will honor my house with a visit, at least on
the pretext of calling on Kandamaran."
The prayer song was over by now and the Officer of
Records had begun reading the edicts of the grant deeds.
First, the royal permit from Sundara Chozla was read.
"Since my beloved daughter Kundavai Pirati has deemed to
donate all her income from the village of Nallur
Mangalam, which I had bestowed upon her with all rights
to all income, resources and responsibilities, since she
wishes to establish this trust for the upkeep of a public
infirmary in the suburbs of Tanjavur, I the Emperor, declare

that the tilled wetlands and drylands of that village be free
of paying tax to the royal treasury." After reading this edict
loudly, the Officer of Royal Records presented the roll of
palmleaf letters to the Elder Lord Pazluvoor who was the
Officer of Finances. Lord Pazluvoor accepted the letter
reverently, with both hands and handed it to his Chief
Accountant to be entered in the records.
After this, details of Kundavai Pirati’s grant was read.
"The farmers of the village of Nallur Mangalam are
permitted to enjoy the rights and resources of all the
taxable lands of the above-mentioned village. In lieu of
being freed of paying just dues to me and in lieu of being
declared free of the tax burden to the royal treasury, the
farmers of the above mentioned village are duty bound as
follows: Every year in future, they will provide resources
for the upkeep of the `Sundara Chozla Infirmary’ in
addition to providing annually, two hundred kalams of
paddy for the Chief Doctor of this Infirmary and fifty
measures of cows-milk, five measures of goats-milk and one
hundred tender coconuts per day for the use of patients
being treated at the Infirmary."
The full text of this grant was engraved on stone with a
preface about the lineage of the grant giver, the identity
and location of the village and its boundary, the location of
the infirmary. In addition, the names of the stone mason
who carved the deed and the officers who witnessed the
correctness of the information, were carved on the stone.
After the stone edict was read and verified, it was
presented to representatives of the village of Nallur
Mangalam, who had come to attend the ceremony.
Village Elders received the stones with respect and
then placed them on a ceremonial elephant which would
carry them to the village in procession. Loud cheers such
as "Long life to Sundara Chozla the Rajakesari who
conquered Madurai!" were raised. About a hundred drums

announced the news with a loud din that filled the skies.
The procession started with cheers like, "Long life to the
Younger Pirati Kundavai Devi!" "Long life to Prince Aditya
Karikala who vanquished Veera-pandiya!" "Long life to
Prince Arulmozli who triumphed in Lanka!" "Long life to
Prince Madurandaka the divine son of devout Gandara
Aditya!"
Finally, slogans of praise such as, "Long life to Elder
Lord Pazluvoor the Officer of Finances and Food Supply, the
Officer of Taxes!" "Long life to Lord Kalanthaka the
Commander of Tanjavur!" were also raised. Towards the
end, the enthusiasm in the cheers and responses was
greatly reduced. The final cheers were raised mainly by
Pazluvoor soldiers; the general public did not respond too
readily.
Kundavai was eager to see Nandini’s face when this
happened; but she was unable to catch a glimpse of her in
the milling crowd. The Princess would have been very
surprised indeed, if she had seen the Young-Queen’s face
when the cheers in praise of Prince Karikala were raised. In
fact, even strong hearted Kundavai would have been
stunned with fright by the expression on Nandini’s
enchanting face.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 19 --"The Spy Is Caught!"
The incidents of the day had greatly irritated Elder
Lord Pazluvoor. It had become an occasion for the people to
display their affection and allegiance to the Emperor and
the royal family.
"People! Commoners! Mindless cattle! All four
thousand will walk the same path if four lead the way down
to an abyss! How many have the capability to use their
common sense?" -- He muttered in this fashion expressing
his anger. "It is obvious that the Emperor will utterly ruin
this Empire before he goes to heaven! He orders, `Remove
tariffs for this town. Free that village from taxes!’ Very soon
there will be no towns or villages paying taxes. But we have
to furnish food supplies and monies for countless battle
campaigns. Where am I to send the supplies from?" He
shouted at no one in particular. The clerks and servants in
the mansion were slightly frightened by his anger.
Finally, Lord Kalanthaka had to come and preach
patience, "Anna! What is the use of shouting in this
fashion? We have to be patient till the time comes and show
our powers in action."
When Lord Pazluvoor heard that Kundavai was about
to pay a visit to his mansion, his irritation crossed the limit.
He walked up to Nandini and asked, "What is this? I hear
that she is coming here. Why should that ogress come
here? Did you invite her? Have you forgotten how she
insulted you?"
"I will never forget the good that one had done to me.
Neither will I forget the insults heaped by another. Don’t
you know my nature by now?" asked Nandini.
"Then, why is she coming here?"
"Her wish, she is coming. Her arrogance in being the
Emperor’s daughter brings her here."

"Why did you invite her?"
"I did not; she invited herself! She said, "Is
Sambuvaraya’s son in your house? I must visit him.’ How
could I say `Don’t come’? A time will come when I can say
it. Till then I have to bear all such insults patiently."
"I cannot be patient. When she comes on the visit, I
cannot remain in this mansion! In fact, I cannot remain in
this city. I have some work in Mazlapadi and I will go
there."
"Do that My Lord! I had been meaning to suggest
something like that. Leave that poisonous snake to me. I
know how to control her. When you come back, if you hear
some astonishing news, don’t be too surprised."
"What astonishing news?"
"You may perhaps hear that Kundavai is planning to
wed Kandamaran; or that Aditya Karikala plans to marry
Kandamaran’s sister Manimekalai."
"What nonsense is this? If anything like that happens,
what about our plans?"
"Does mere talk mean that an act has taken place? You
have been telling your friends that Madurandaka is the
next King. Is that really going to happen? Are we striving
like this to crown that effeminate fool Madurandaka?"
Nandini blinked her large eyes and looked at the Elder
Lord of Pazluvoor.
He was no match to her beguiling looks. He sat down
beside her and picked up her hands, kissing them, "My
Darling! Soon, you will sit on this Chozla throne as its allpowerful Empress," he said.
Kandamaran was very agitated and restless from the
minute he found that Kundavai was about to pay him a visit.
Kundavai’s intelligence, beauty and greatness were famous.
The Younger Pirati was about to visit him. What a great

honor it was! I would have willingly borne several more
bruises and fallen even more sick for such an honor! Oh
Dear! Why wasn’t I wounded on my chest in such a
situation? How admirable it would have been if Kundavai
had come to see me with such wounds. Instead of that, I
have to once again, repeat this wretched story of my
friend’s betrayal and his dastardly deed.
In the midst of such thoughts, he recalled how his
family was involved in schemes against her and her family;
that mortified him. Kandamaran was an honest young man.
He was not used to cunning and crafty conspiracies.
Though Nandini’s enchanting beauty had fascinated him,
he controlled his passions with the thought that she was
another man’s wife. But Kundavai Pirati was not married.
How should I behave with her? What should I talk
about? Can I hide something in my heart and speak
pleasantries with her? Or, will I become slave to her beauty
and forget my promises to my father and his friends? I
should not let that happen! Why does the Princess want to
talk with me? Let her come, I’ll say something uncivilized
and obnoxious so that she never comes back...
All his resolve vanished the minute he saw Kundavai.
Kandamaran lost his convictions when confronted by her
polished manner, beauty, charm, modesty, dignity and
pleasant words of solace. His imagination broke bounds
and ran wild. He recounted all his deeds of bravery as if he
was reluctant to talk about them, but was speaking upon
her insistence. He pointed out his old war-wounds, the
healed scars on his shoulders and chest, as if he was
reluctant to show them.
"It would have been better if Vandiya Devan, that
disloyal friend of mine, had struck me on my chest and
killed me. I am embarrassed that he wounded my back
before he escaped and that I have to tell you all this. I don’t

wish to become infamous as the coward who turned his
back on a conflict. I would have readily forgiven him if he
had wounded me on my shoulders or on my chest."
Kundavai felt that Kandamaran’s emotional words had
a ring of truth in them. She wondered if Vandiya Devan
could have done the dastardly deed and if she had been
mistaken about her brother’s messenger. She asked
Kandamaran to describe the incident in detail. Even
Nandini was thrown into a sea of surprise by the
imaginative tale told by young Kandamaran!
"My Lady, he fooled me even on that night he had
stayed in my house at Kadamboor. He never revealed why
he was going to Tanjavur. He entered this fort by showing
some false identity and even met the Emperor with
falsehoods about bringing letters from Crown Prince
Karikala. He did not stop with that. He even involved your
honored name saying that he was carrying letters for you!
That made the Commander suspicious about him. The
Commander wondered if he was a spy and placed him
under guard. Somehow, Vandiya Devan escaped. One has to
give him credit for his ingenuity. When I heard this story,
the only thing that I did not believe was this -- that my
friend could be an enemy spy. He has certain defects in his
character; I felt that this was some foolish weakness in him.
`I shall somehow find him and bring him to you. You must
pardon him.’ With such promises and conditions to the
Commander, I left Tanjavur Fort.
"At midnight, I was walking along the banks of River
Vadavaru which surrounds this fort. I did not wish to take
anyone with me thereby adding to the disgrace of my
friend. A fellow escaping from this fort must emerge
somewhere from the fortress walls; or, he must be hiding
somewhere in the nearby woods. That’s why I walked along
the banks of the river. In the dim moonlight, I could make
out the form of a fellow climbing down the outer wall. I

went and stood in front of him and asked, `Friend, what
have you done?’ That odious fellow punched me on my
chest. I, who have borne the blows of an elephant was not
affected by his punches. I hit him back with my fist because
I could not tolerate his behavior in picking a fight with me
who had gone there with good intentions. We wrestled for a
while. Within minutes he was tired, begging my
forgiveness. I forgave him and said, `Tell me the truth
about why you have come here. I may be able to help you.’
He replied that he was tired, `Let us sit somewhere and
talk.’ I agreed and led the way. I was walking ahead;
suddenly, that fellow struck me from behind with a knife.
Half a foot of that knife sank into my flesh; I fainted and fell
to the ground. That betrayer of friendship escaped. When I
regained consciousness, I found myself in a mute-woman’s
house."
Nandini laughed to herself on hearing this imaginary
story of Kandamaran. Kundavai was not able to decide on
how much of it could be believed.
"How did you come to the mute-woman’s house? Who
brought you there?" asked Kundavai.
"That is an unexplained mystery to me! That dumb
woman did not know anything. Even if she knew, she has
been unable to explain. Apparently, she has a young son.
He too disappeared on that night. No one knows his
whereabouts. If that son returns, he might be able to shed
some light on the matter. Otherwise, I have to be patient till
the Pazluvoor soldiers arrest my friend Vandiya Devan."
"Do you think that he will be arrested?"
"How can he escape? He cannot bind wings and fly
away! That’s why, mainly to meet him, I am remaining here
in Tanjavur. I would have gone home otherwise. I am still
confident of earning a pardon for my friend from the Lords
of Pazluvoor."

"Sir! You are to be commended for your unselfishness,"
said Kundavai Pirati. But her heart said, Vandiya Devan
should not be arrested ... even if he is a traitor.
A servant maid came running into the chamber,
"Madam! The spy is caught! They are bringing him down
the street."
Nandini and Kundavai -- both their faces were covered
by an expression of wounded pain. Nandini controlled
herself instantly. Kundavai could not do so.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 20 --Tigress Against Tigress
When a servant maid announced that the spy was
caught and that he was being brought down the street, all
three persons in the room felt a certain agitation in their
hearts. Kundavai Pirati was more disturbed than the other
two.
Nandini asked, "Princess, shall we go and see what
that cunning spy looks like?"
Kundavai hesitated, "Why should we bother about
him?"
"Fine; if you say so!" Nandini appeared nonchalant.
"I want to see; I’ll go," saying this Kandamaran stood
up unsteadily.
"Don’t get up. You cannot walk; you will fall..." Nandini
was by his side.
Kundavai seemed to have changed her mind. "Let us
find out what he looks like ... this dear friend! Can we see
the street from the balcony or terrace of this mansion?"
"We can see very clearly. Come with me." Nandini led
the way.
"My Lady, if it is really my friend, please arrange with
Uncle Pazluvoor for me to meet him and talk to him," said
Kandamaran.
Nandini turned around, "How can we know if he is
your friend?" She glanced towards Kundavai.
"Then, I’ll come with you to identify him!" Kandamaran
walked with faltering steps.
All three stepped onto a balcony on the upper story of
the mansion. Seven or eight horses were coming down the
street below, from a distance. Soldiers bearing arms were
riding those horses. A man was walking in their midst. His

hands were crossed behind him and bound with ropes. Two
horsemen on both sides were holding the ends of the ropes
that bound him. A gawking mob was following behind this
cavalcade. At first the face of the man walking amidst the
horsemen was not visible to those standing on the balcony.
Silence prevailed on the terrace till the procession
came closer. Kundavai’s eager, worried eyes were fixed on
the procession coming closer. Nandini was engaged in
bending down to look at the street and glancing back at
Kundavai’s face. Kandamaran broke the silence that dwelt
on that narrow balcony.
"No! This is not Vandiya Devan!"
Kundavai’s face brightened. By now, the remarkable
parade had come in front of that mansion. The fellow bound
by the ropes and being dragged by the horsemen, looked
up. Kundavai recognized him as Pinakapani, the Doctor’s
son from Pazlayarai. As if to say something, the fellow
opened his mouth while looking up. But the ropes that
bound him dragged him forward.
Without disclosing her happiness, Kundavai said,
"What foolishness is this? Why have they dragged him here
like this? He is the son of the Doctor in Pazlayarai."
"Oh! Is that so? My brother-in-law’s men are always
like this. They will let the real culprit escape, arrest some
innocent fellow and torture him," said Nandini.
Kandamaran was speaking again, "Ah! My friend
Vandiya Devan won’t be caught so easily. He is very crafty.
He fooled even me; will he be caught by these men?"
"Why do you still refer to him as your friend?" asked
Nandini.
"He betrayed me. But in my heart, my regard for him
has not changed."

"Perhaps these soldiers have killed your dear friend! I
had been told that these men had followed two spies to
Kodi Karai." After saying this, Nandini looked at Kundavai.
She found that the word "killed" tortured the Younger
Pirati.
You proud female! I have a weapon for revenge on you!
If I don’t utilize it fully, my name is not Nandini, the YoungQueen of Pazluvoor. Wait! Just you wait!
Kundavai covered her disquiet with rage, "What
spies!? Utter foolishness. As days go by, these old men
seem to loose all their senses. They seem to suspect
everyone! I had sent this man to Kodi Karai to collect
medicinal herbs. Why did they arrest him? I must ask your
brother-in-law immediately!"
"Oh! Is he the man sent by you, Princess? You talked
about suspicion. I too have a suspicion -- now. Did you send
just this one man to collect medicinal herbs? Did you send
another fellow also?" asked Nandini.
"Yes, I had sent another man with him. I had asked one
of them to go to the Island of Lanka if necessary."
"Aha! I understand everything now. It’s just as I had
guessed."
"I don’t understand. What did you guess? What has
happened?"
"I have no more doubts; everything is clear. My Lady,
was the other man you sent with this fellow known to you?
Or, was he a newcomer?"
Kundavai Pirati hesitated, "What newcomer? He is the
same fellow who brought me letters from Kanchi; from my
elder brother."
"It’s him! It is him!" said Nandini bringing her palms
together in glee.

"Who?"
"He... The spy! He had lied here also -- about bringing
letters for the Emperor."
"Why did they suspect him to be a spy?"
"How will I know that? It’s an official secret guarded
by the men. As a matter of fact, that spy did act
suspiciously. Why did he run away in the night? Why did he
wound this poor gentleman on his back?"
"I cannot believe that he was the man who stabbed
this gentleman. If he had stabbed with the knife, why did
he carry this gentleman to the mute’s house?" Kundavai
asked.
"You speak as if you witnessed the whole incident, My
Lady! Somehow, you seem concerned about that spy. He
must be a magician. Even this gentleman still calls him a
friend! Anyway, who cares? A lost life cannot be regained.
If these soldiers had killed him..."
Beads of perspiration darkened Kundavai’s face. Her
eyes reddened and throat choked; heart beats became
rapid. "It couldn’t have happened. It cannot be..." she
mumbled under her breath.
"... If that spy was as cunning as this gentleman
claims..." Nandini continued her conjectures.
"Princess, I am sure. Vandiya Devan would never have
been caught by these soldiers." Kandamaran spoke
positively.
"If not now, another time. He is sure to be arrested."
Nandini did not give up.
Kundavai crunched her teeth, "Who knows what can
happen tomorrow?" She continued with anger, "Since the
Emperor fell ill and took to his sickbed, the whole country
has turned topsy-turvy! What powers do these nobles have

to arrest men sent by me to collect medicinal plants? I will
discuss this with my father at once."
"My Lady, why should you disturb your father about
this petty matter? Why don’t you question my brother-inlaw? Perhaps he was not aware of your wishes. He will act
suitably, if you let him know your intentions. None can dare
to cross the wishes of the Younger Pirati in this Chozla
Empire!" Nandini tried to soothe her rage.
In that conflict between two tigresses that day,
Nandini was the victor. Several wounds afflicted Kundavai’s
heart. She had to make a tremendous effort to conceal her
emotions.
****
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 21 --Dungeons
There is nothing more enigmatic than life on earth.
Who knows the why and where forth of comfort or sadness?
The skies remain clear for long periods of time. Suddenly,
dark clouds collect from all eight directions, plunging the
world into darkness; thunder rolls, lightning strikes and
rain drenches everything. Sometimes it would appear as if
the very meaning of a breeze had vanished from earth.
Even leaves on trees stand still. An unexpected whirlwind
blows from somewhere, swirling and twisting. Large trees
are uprooted in its path. Luscious groves which appeared
pleasant till recently, turn into gardens ruined by monkey
hordes.
Such a whirlwind was now swirling in Kundavai’s life.
Till recently she had no idea of worries. Life was an
endless, happy carnival. Love and affection, song and
dance, poetry and painting, jewels and adornments, garden
parties and boating trips -- these filled her days. Everyone -her parents, brothers, ministers, teachers, friends, servants
and slaves thought of her as their cherished darling. She
was aware of emotions like sadness and worry only through
conjecture in poetry and drama. When misfortune came to
her, it piled one upon the other.
Her father’s situation was cause for concern. There
was danger to the Empire. Her brothers were far away in
distant lands. Astrologers and soothsayers had been cryptic
in predicting some unexplainable danger that was about to
befall her clan. Secret, treacherous meetings were being
held in the Kingdom. People were gripped by an unfamiliar
fear. Kundavai, born in a clan that gave birth to generations
of brave warriors, had the strength to face all such
obstacles. She was confident of solving all these problems
to her family and Empire with her sharp intellect. However,

a minor incident, an unexpected meeting became the cause
to disturb her confidence.
When Kundavai met Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan, a
lotus bud that was her heart opened its petals gently and
bloomed in full glory. How unfortunate! A dark-bee came to
sit on that bloom, to bruise its soft petals with poisonous
stings.
The mere thought that the gallant of the Vaanar clan
might have been arrested distressed her. Those harsh
words -- he might have been killed -- they broke her heart!
How difficult it was to hide those feelings! When she had so
many who were near and dear to her -- her parents,
siblings, close friends, and relatives -- why was her heart so
agitated about some wayfarer whom she had met casually,
perhaps twice or thrice? But there was no time now, to
examine and pinpoint the cause and effect of such
sentiments. Without much delay, without worrying about
the right time, she must make the needed enquiries and act
immediately.
She sent word to Younger Lord Pazluvoor that she
would visit him that afternoon itself, perhaps view the Art
Gallery... And she went. Womenfolk in that palace
welcomed her eagerly; they showered her with affection
and courtesy. The Princess spent some time with them,
conversing pleasantly about this and that. She then walked
to the Art Gallery. Lord Kalanthaka was waiting to welcome
her; he led her to the gallery, acting as a guide pointing out
the finer details of the paintings. Kundavai looked at every
picture, listened to all his explanations, without uttering a
single word.
Finally, when the last picture was seen, she turned to
him. She looked at him from head to toe and said, "Sir!
Nobles of the Pazluvoor clan have been of incomparable
service to the Chozla family, over several generations!"

"It is our good fortune, My Lady!" Lord Kalanthaka
bowed very low.
"There is no doubt ... that this Chozla Empire is an
appropriate reward for such service..."
"Thaye! What word is this?!"
"But you could wait till the Emperor’s life is ended and
he has reached his heavenly abode. Why such impatience to
grab the powers of this Empire?"
Kalanthaka’s face revealed that these words pierced
like sharp arrows through his heart. Beads of sweat formed
on his forehead. The mustache drooped and limbs shivered
with fear. Mopping his face with a scarf, he said, "My Lady!
Why this rage? Are you planning to dispatch me to the
world of Death with arrows of mere words?"
"Sir! You know that I have no such powers. Even the
Lord of Death is afraid to approach Lord Kalanthaka and
his domains. What can I, a mere girl, do?"
"My Lady, perhaps it would be better if you poured
molten lead down my ears instead of such harsh words.
What have I done, that the Princess has to bestow such
`royal mercy’ on me?"
"Who am I to talk about your faults? You, -- tell me
about my mistakes. Is it wrong for me to send men to
collect medicinal plants for healing my father?"
"No, My Lady! It can never be wrong."
"Were you not aware that I had sent the Doctor’s son
from Pazlayarai to collect medicinal plants from Kodi
Karai?"
"I knew of it, My Lady."
"This morning, I saw that man, bound with ropes,
being dragged down the streets of this city by your men.

Did you order it? Did you do it in spite of being aware that
he was my retainer?"
"Yes, My Lady! No! Perhaps you had not known that he
was a spy?" Lord Kalanthaka was rattled.
"The Doctor’s son is a spy! What nonsense! Do you
want me to believe this fable?"
"Thaye! What if he had confessed? Wouldn’t you believe
it then?”
The Princess was stunned for one moment. "He
confessed! What did he confess? How?"
"He agreed that the other man who went with him is a
spy. He said that the other fellow did not go on the journey
to really collect herbs; that man was travelling with some
letters for someone in Lanka."
"He is a fool; prattling nonsense. That other man who
journeyed with him was also sent by me. I am sure you
knew that too."
"I was aware of that My Lady. But I also know that the
other fellow misled you. That youth, named Vandiya Devan
is really a spy."
"Never. He is the messenger sent by my brother from
Kanchi, with letters for me."
"Princess, he brought letters for the Emperor also
from your brother in Kanchi. So what? Spies use all kinds
of tricks to fulfil their mission."
"Sir, what proof do you have to declare that Vandiya
Devan is a spy?"
"If he is not a spy, why did he travel along country
roads and byways instead of going on the Royal Highway?
He even stopped at an astrologer’s house in Kudanthai,
asking about the Emperor’s health!"

"Even I discussed the Emperor’s health with the
Astrologer of Kudanthai. What is wrong with that?"
"You, a cherished daughter, asking about the Emperor
is quite different from unknown adventurers asking such
questions. Spies sent by enemy kings might ask such
questions."
"That is your opinion. What other proof do you have?"
"He could have entered Tanjavur Fort openly, after
obtaining my permission. Instead, he entered clandestinely
showing the Pazluvoor signet. He lied, saying that Elder
Lord Pazluvoor had given him that signet ring with the
palmtree symbol. Why did he do that?"
"Who gave him that signet ring?"
"I do not know; I must find out."
"What are your men doing, instead of finding out that
information?"
"My Lady! My men are not magicians. We have to find
the spy and arrest him before we can question him about
how he got that ring."
"How can you be sure that he will speak the truth?"
"There are ways to make him tell the truth. We have
the Dungeons of Tanjavur. But the spy seemed to know
about our secret passages. That is why he was able to
escape and leave this fort in that same night. He also
stabbed Sambuvaraya’s son."
"What proof do you have that he was the man who
stabbed Kandamaran?"
"Kandamaran’s statement."
"That is not enough! I state that he did not stab
Sambuvaraya’s son."
"My Lady, did you personally witness the incident?"

"No. But I can examine a fellows face and decide if he
is at fault or not."
"That wicked spy is fortunate! Somehow, the spy has
earned your good opinion. I have not been fortunate like
him!"
"Sir, you continue to call him `spy!’ Why?"
"Thaye! If he was not a spy, why did he mingle with the
street players and enter Pazlayarai covertly? Why did he
disguise himself as a doctor and travel to Kodi Karai? If he
was not a spy, why did he remain hidden for one whole day
from my men in Kodi Karai? Why did he sail away to Lanka
by nightfall?"
"Oh! Did he go away on a boat and escape to Lanka?
Couldn’t your men catch him?" Kundavai could not conceal
the delight in her voice.
"Yes, My Lady. That magical spy fooled my men and
escaped. These idiots let him go and arrested the Doctor’s
son."
"Sir, forget that spy; I don’t care about him. I sent the
Doctor’s son and I am sure that he is innocent. You must
free him immediately."
"My Lady, even if he is not a spy, he helped the real
spy. He tried to confuse my men with all sorts of stories. He
helped the spy to hide in the forests of Kodi Karai for one
whole day and later escape in a boat."
"I don’t care. You must free the Doctor’s son."
"I am not ready to accept that responsibility. Danger
surrounds our country from all directions. Enemies await to
invade us. Veera-pandiya’s bodyguards, the Aabathudavis,
have sworn to destroy the roots of the Chozla clan.
Conspiracies everywhere ..."

"Sir, if one were to throw all conspirators into prison,
there will be no room in the prison."
"We can lock them up as long as we have room!"
"Reserve some room for locking up the real traitors.
Sir, free the Doctor’s son immediately."
"As I said, I cannot accept that responsibility, My
Lady."
"Will you obey if the Emperor orders it? Or will you
disobey him also?"
"Princess, I do not need the Emperor’s orders for this.
The world knows that the Younger Pirati’s wish and will is
gospel to the Emperor. Here, I am giving you these keys to
the Dungeons of Tanjavur. You may personally open the
doors and free him. If you wish to free anyone else, you are
welcome to do so. You are responsible for the
consequences."
Lord Kalanthaka unbound a heavy bunch of keys from
his waistband and presented it to the Princess. Kundavai
controlled her rage and said, "Fine! I shall bear the
responsibility for the consequences!" She accepted the
keys.
"If any grave danger threatens this Chozla Empire, it is
surely because of two women!" Lord Kalanthaka spoke with
disgust.
"I am one; who is the other?" asked Kundavai.
"It is the Young-Queen of Pazluvoor, Nandini Devi."
Finally, Kundavai smiled wholeheartedly, "You equate
me with the all-powerful authority of this Chozla Empire! If
he comes to hear of it, your brother the Elder Lord
Pazluvoor will banish you from this land!"
"That will be perfect. I shall wait for it," said
Kalanthaka the Younger Lord Pazluvoor.

***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 22 --Sendan Amudan In Prison
The Royal Mint inside Tanjavur Fort where gold coins
were engraved was like a mini fortress. It had guards and
security just like the entrance to Tanjavur Fort itself.
Kundavai Devi and her friend Vanathi Devi went to inspect
this mint, late in the evening that day. The goldsmiths had
finished work for the day and were ready to leave. Security
guards were ready to examine the goldsmiths and let them
depart. They had all collected in the entrance hallway. It
was at this moment that a chariot from the palace came to
stop near the gate. Kundavai and Vanathi dismounted. On
seeing them, guards and goldsmiths alike became very
happy and began to raise cheers of greeting, "Long life to
the Younger Pirati!"
The Headman of the mint came running to welcome
them. He received them eagerly and led them inside.
Furnaces for melting gold and other metals, molds used for
minting coins, polishing and engraving tools, minted coins
and blank forms -- all these were shown to them; every
process was explained in detail. Gold coins, freshly minted
on that day were heaped in a pile towards one side. The
shining pure gold blinded their eyes. Each coin was
engraved with a leaping tiger on one side and a sailing ship
on the reverse.

(Note: Until the early years of this Chozla Dynasty, not
much coinage was minted in the Tamil lands. Though coins
were in free circulation and widely used in trade, the
coinage itself was often imported. Coins minted in other
nations, particularly large quantities of Roman and Greek
coins, were imported for use as legal tender. Earlier,
indigenous mintage was usually in silver, copper and other
base metals. Cowrie shells were often used as money in
remote areas and for petty transactions.)
"Look Vanathi! From times immemorial, gold was
imported into our country from all over the world by land

and by sea. Our womenfolk bore the burden of carrying all
this gold till recent times. They converted the gold into
beautiful ornaments and carried the heavy jewelry on their
person. For some time now this heavy burden has been
reduced for Chozla women. Our Finance Officer, Lord
Pazluvoor has made arrangements to mint such beautiful
coins," said Kundavai.
Vanathi asked, "Akka, what is the use of such coins?"
"Use? How ignorant you are, Vanathi! If gold is minted
into such coins of standard weight, one can establish its
value without weighing large quantities of metal. People
can pay taxes to their king with these. When merchants
trade in foreign ports, they do not have to be encumbered
with complications of barter with cumbersome goods. They
can buy goods for these gold coins; they can sell stuff in
exchange for such coins. That is why merchants are full of
praise for our Finance Officer.... But let me tell you another
secret!" Kundavai explained all this and then lowered her
voice before she continued, "The coins are very convenient
for villains who conspire against the Emperor and his
family. The most honest man can be turned traitor by these
shining pieces of gold!"
The Headman of the Mint, who was standing close by
heard these softly spoken words. He said, "Yes, My Lady.
We hear such frightening rumors these days. That is why
the security in this mint has been increased in recent days.
The number of persons coming and going from the
dungeons below this mint has also increased."
"I’ve heard of prisoners coming into Tanjavur’s
Dungeons; are there people who leave it also?" asked
Kundavai Pirati.
"Why not? We have such persons too! One man was
brought in this morning; about half an hour ago, he was
taken away."

Kundavai wondered about who
that prisoner could have been. She
had come here mainly because the
access door to the underground
dungeons of Tanjavur which held
political prisoners was situated in
an inner court of the mint. Instead
of using the separate street-side
entrance to that antechamber, she
came through the mint. After
inspecting the various work areas
of the mint, she walked towards
this inner room. A small door was
found on the farthest wall of this
chamber. They opened that door
and walked ahead. It was another
wide courtyard with a low, vaulted
ceiling and dim light. They could
hear frightening growls from all
four corners. A soldier stood with a
lighted torch at the head of this
passage-like room that sloped

downwards on one end. When their
eyes adjusted to the dim light, they
could discern several cages along
all the walls. They could see the
beasts in those cages: growling
tigers, lions and cheetahs. The big
cats swished their tails as they
walked to and fro, to and fro in
their cages. Their eyes glowed like
yellow embers in the dim light of
that chamber.
Kundavai held on tightly to
Vanathi’s hand and said, "Are you
frightened? Please don’t fall down
in a faint in here!"
Vanathi chuckled, "I am not
afraid of tigers, Akka! Tigers are
guardian angels of our clans."
"Sometimes guards can change
sides to favor the enemy. Then it
could be very dangerous."

"No, Akka. Human guards can
become such traitors. These tigers
won’t do any such thing."
"We cannot be sure. These cats
have eaten many political traitors.
Their blood flows in the veins of
these tigers, so..."
"Akka! What are you saying?
Will they feed living human beings
to these cats?" Vanathi who had
just declared that she was not
afraid, shivered.
"No. They won’t do that! Remember, what I had told
you? Tanjavur’s underground prisons are located below this
mint. There is only one way to enter or leave those prisons
and that entrance is from this tiger-room. Anyone trying to
escape from Tanjavur’s Dungeons has to come through this
chamber; then they would become prey to these tigers and
lions."
"Oh, good Lord! What horror!"

"Governing is like that. There is
mercy as well as horror. Vanathi, a
time may come when I myself may
be thrown into this underground

prison. If you had heard the
conversation,
I
had
with
Commander Kalanthaka..."
"Absurd, Akka! There is no
power that can imprison you in all
the
fourteen
worlds
of
this
universe! If anybody tries to do
anything like that, the earth will
split open and swallow this
Tanjavur City. I am not worried
about that; I am concerned about
the son of our Doctor from
Pazlayarai. I hope that innocent
man did not try to escape."
"Innocent man! Who knows who
will become a double-crosser or
when they would do so?" said
Kundavai a little bitterly.
As they walked onwards, the
growl of tigers became louder.
Kundavai looked at the soldier

following them and asked, "The
tigers seem very angry, why?"
The soldier replied cleverly, "No,
My Lady! They are happily
welcoming our beloved Emperor’s
gracious daughter."
"Good
welcome!"
laughed
Kundavai.
"It is time to feed these tigers.
They are growling for food."
"Oh! Let us finish and leave
quickly. Where is the entrance?"
By now, they had walked to the
end of that chamber. Some soldiers
pushed one of the lion cages aside.
A small doorway buried on the floor
was revealed. Two men bent down
and lifted the trap-door. The open
door-way revealed a flight of steps.
They went down those steps, one
after the other in single file. It

became darker; smokey torches
held by two soldiers shed some
light.
Narrow
passage-ways
crisscrossed randomly. The room
above ground had been filled with
the frightening growl of tigers and
lions; this room below ground was
echoing with piteous wails and
cries for help. The screams from
various prisoners unnerved their
hearts, making their limbs tremble.
In the midst of all those wails, a
surprise. An astonishing sound -- a
pleasant voice was singing a song!
O Lord of golden-hued body with a tiger skin draped around the waist;
Upon matted locks, burnished red, you wear a shining crescent!

The cells in that prison were not
arranged in straight rows. They
were here and there; around
corners and embedded in walls;
randomly placed in that narrow
space excavated by stone masons.

The soldier stepped up to each cell
and held up his torch. Some rooms
held only one man; some housed
two. Many cells were empty. In
some rooms, the prisoner was
chained to the wall with heavy
metal bands embedded in the
stone. When light fell on the faces
of these prisoners, Kundavai shook
her head and they moved ahead.
Vanathi asked, "What horror is
this? Why are these people shut up
like this? Is there no fair trial or
enquiry?"
"Ordinary crimes are dealt with
proper trial and justice. But treason
against king and government,
foreign spies and those who aid
and abet such spies are thrown into
these cells. Once they have
extracted the truth from them, they

may be allowed to go. Sometimes,
there is nothing to be learned from
some of them. They can confess
only if there is something to
confess! Their lot is difficult."
They had now come closer to the
voice that was singing the "Lord of
golden-hued body" lyric. When the
guard held up the torch to cast
light in that cell, they could see a
young man inside. He is an old
acquaintance of ours; Sendan
Amudan.
The Princess was touched by his pleasant, innocent,
young face. Kundavai asked him, "Are you the one who was
singing?"
"Yes, Thaye!"
"You seem happy!"
"I have no dearth of joy and happiness. The allpervading Lord is here with me."
"You talk like a big philosopher. Who are you, young
man? What was your occupation?"
"I am neither a big philosopher nor a small
philosopher. Amma! When I lived outside, I strung flower

garlands and offered them to God. Here, I sing lyrics for
our Lord."
"You are not only a philosopher, but also a poet. Is this
the only song you know? Do you know many other lyrics?"
"I know some other lyrics also. But since I came here, I
have been singing this same song."
"Why?" asked Kundavai.
"When I came here, I walked through the gold mint. I
saw heaps of pure gold in quantities that I had never
imagined. It reminded me of our Lord with the golden-hued
body."
"You are blessed. People are tempted by various
passions when they see wealth. Your mind was filled with
thoughts of God. Don’t you have any kith or kin?"
"Just a mother. She lives in the flower garden in
Tanjavur’s suburbs."
"Her name?"
"Vaani Ammai."
"I shall meet her and tell her that you are happy and
well here in this prison."
"It’s of no use Thaye. My mother can neither hear, nor
speak."
Kundavai was astonished. She asked, "Oh! Is your
name Sendan Amudan?"
"Yes, My Lady! You seem to be aware of this poor
fellow’s name!" Sendan Amudan was equally surprised.
"Why did they bring you here? What crime did they
charge you with?"
"Till yesterday, I did not know what crime I had
committed. Today, I found out."
"What did you find out?"

"I found that I was arrested and imprisoned for the
crime of helping a spy."
"How is that? Which spy did you help?"
"One day, I met a foreign traveler outside Tanjavur
Fort. He said that he was looking for a place to spend the
night. I led him to my house, not even dreaming that he
could be a spy."
"Do you know his name?"
"He said that his name was Vandiya Devan
Vallavarayan. He said that he belonged to the ancient
Vaanar clan."
Kundavai and Vanathi looked at each other. They
seemed to agree about something. Vanathi spoke, "Please
tell us all the details, Sir!"
Sendan Amudan told his tale. He described everything
from the minute he had met Vandiya Devan outside
Tanjavur Fort till he had been caught on the river bank by
Pazluvoor soldiers. Vanathi asked, "Why did you trust a
strange adventurer like that and help him so much?"
"Thaye! Sometimes we take a liking to people just by
looking at them. We are ready to even give up our life for
them. Who can explain why we feel such emotions?
Sometimes, if we see some fellows, we feel like killing them
immediately. Today, one man was imprisoned in this same
cell with me. The anger I felt against him was limitless!
Fortunately for him, he was freed a short while ago by
retainers of the Young-Queen of Pazluvoor."
"What?" asked Kundavai who could not control herself.
She bit her lips and tried to keep quiet. Her eyebrows were
knit in anger and nostrils trembling with rage.
"Who was that man? Freed in such a hurry? Do you
know?"

"I know; apparently he is a son of the Doctor in
Pazlayarai. His name is Pinakapani."
"What outrageous things did he say, that you wished to
kill him?"
"My uncle’s daughter Poonkuzlali lives at Kodi Karai.
This man uttered dishonorable words about her. That’s why
I was so angry with him. But he also gave me some good
news; that’s why I let him go free!"
"What
Kundavai.

is

that

good

news,

young

man?"

asked

"Apparently this man had gone to Kodi Karai with my
friend Vandiya Devan. This wretch tried to betray my friend
over there by trying to help Pazluvoor soldiers in finding
him. But he could not succeed."
"Could not succeed? Did that spy escape?" Both
Vanathi and Kundavai asked this question eagerly. They had
come this far into the Dungeons of Tanjavur only to find out
this news.
"Yes, Ladies. My friend escaped. Apparently
Poonkuzlali took him in her boat by midnight and they had
gone away to Lanka. The searching soldiers were
hoodwinked; this man was also fooled."
Both women looked at each other in happiness. Their
faces reflected their joy. Kundavai turned back to Sendan
Amudan and said, "Sir, how can you be so happy about a
spy escaping from royal soldiers? Perhaps it is correct that
you have been thrown in this prison."
"Thaye! If it is correct to imprison me for that crime,
both of you must be placed in this cell next to me!"
The two women laughed. In that dark dungeon, their
laughter was just as curious as the song of Sendan
Amudan.

"You are very clever. Very tricky! You will corrupt
everyone else in this prison with your songs if we leave you
here. I will ask the Commander of this fort to arrange for
your release as soon as possible," promised Kundavai.
"Please do not do any such thing My Lady! There is a
man in the cell next to me. Every day he begs me to teach
him to sing. He repeats a hundred times, `If you teach me
one song, I’ll tell you the secret of where the Pandiya crown
jewels are hidden in Lanka.’ Let me remain here till I find
out that secret," said Sendan Amudan happily.
"Poor fellow! Are you ready to remain here till you also
go mad like him? What about the fate of your mother Vaani,
if you go mad like that?" With these words, Kundavai
turned back. Within half an hour, soldiers came to release
Sendan Amudan from the prison. They set him free outside
Tanjavur Fort.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 23 --Nandini’s Letter
One evening, Nandini was seated in her garden
gazebo, on the swing seat covered with a goose-down
mattress. She was engaged in writing a letter. She wrote a
few lines; while phrasing the message, her body shivered
like a delicate creeper tossed in the winds. She sighed
heavily and quite often. Her forehead was beaded with
perspiration even in that cool evening, though her maid
Vasuki stood nearby, fanning her mistress with a fan of
peacock feathers. The letter included this passage:
"..... O’ Prince, as I said, I venture to write this letter
with much hesitation, much fear. I hear all kinds of rumors
about the political situation. You don’t seem to care about
anything. Though your father, weakened by illness has
asked you several times, you have refused to come back to
Tanjavur. I wonder, if I am the cause for it; I am tortured by
that thought. If only I could meet you -- just once, I will be
able to clear all doubts. Will you kindly indulge me? If you
dislike coming to Tanjavur, we can meet at Kadamboor, in
Sambuvaraya’s fortress. Today, I am a grandmother to you
by relationship. Who can object to our meeting or talking?
I shall ask brave young Kandamaran to bring this letter to
you. He is Sambuvaraya’s son and can be trusted
completely. You can send any message you wish through
him. I, the most unfortunate of beings -- Nandini, a sibling
of all wretchedness in the world -- write these words to you
...."
She really hesitated a lot while she wrote the words.
After quite some time, she completed the letter and sealed
it. She placed the roll of palm leaves in a tube-shaped
casket and sealed that letter-container also. At last, she
turned to her maid, "Go! Go ask the Young Lord of
Kadamboor to come here immediately."

The maid led Kandamaran into the gazebo and stepped
aside. Kandamaran balked to look at Nandini’s face. He
stood there looking at something in the garden.
"Sir, please sit down," said Nandini with a tremble in
her voice. That made him turn back and stare at her face.
"There is nothing surprising that you do not wish to
look at me with your eyes that have gazed upon Kundavai’s
face!" Nandini said this with a playful smile. His heart was
split open by her words; her smile dazzled him into
dizziness.
In a very flustered voice he mumbled, "A thousand
Kundavai’s cannot compare with one Nandini Devi!"
"Still, if Kundavai shakes her little finger, you will fly
up to the heavens and bring back Lord Indra’s throne! You
won’t even sit down by my side even if I beg you."
Kandamaran sat down immediately, "If you order it, I
shall go to the abode of Lord Brahma and bring his head for
you if you wish!"
Nandini shivered. She looked away from him as she
spoke, "Even after Lord Shiva had plucked one head,
Brahma has been left with four heads. Even if you pluck
one more, Brahma will continue to live!"
"My Lady, talk to me about anything you wish. Please
do not mention Kundavai Devi’s name or praise her; my
blood boils to think that she is sympathetic to Vandiya
Devan who betrayed my friendship."
"However, it is a fact that your imagination was
incredible when you met Kundavai. What a fantastic
description you gave, about that fight, the wrestling match
you had with your friend!" These words of Nandini made
him feel somewhat embarrassed.
"I had to say something to explain how I had met him.
That’s why I said it. But it is true that he stabbed me."

"Sir, don’t you think it may be wise for you to try and
remember all the details of that incident, as it really
happened?"
"Even you suspect my statement, My Lady?"
"I don’t doubt you. But you have forgotten some
details. Vandiya Devan will surely be arrested one of these
days. Then, this accusation by you must be proved correct,
don’t you think?"
"I don’t really care. I still wish to forgive him."

"I congratulate you for your
generosity. But it is better that we
make sure of the truth between us.
Try and remember, once again,
everything that happened on that
night. When you came back
through that underground passage,
you met me and Lord Pazluvoor. Do
you
remember
that?"
asked
Nandini.
"I remember very well. I can
never forget that meeting as long
as I live."
"Do you recollect the words you
spoke at that time?"

"I do not remember the exact
words. I know that I was
mesmerized by seeing you."
"I remember your words very
well. `Sir, I have heard a lot about
the beauty of your daughter!
Nothing that I heard compares with
the reality before my eyes.’ -- that
is what you said."
"Oh, Good Lord! Is that what I
said? Perhaps that is why he looked
so furious. Even now, he does not
like me much..."
Nandini laughed and said, "It
does not matter, if he does not like
you; I hope you like him? That
should be enough!"
"My Lady, let me tell you the
truth. There is no point in hiding it
from you. I too, do not like him,"

said
Kandamaran
with
some
passion.
"Nothing wrong in that. I like
him; that’s what matters. I must
have performed several penances
to be rewarded a husband like
him."
Kandamaran was completely
confused by these words of
Nandini. He did not know what to
say.
"Forget that now. What did you
do after meeting me in that
underground passage?"
"That servant who held the torch
went ahead showing the way. I
followed, filled with thoughts of
you. The servant opened the secret
door and stepped aside. I stepped
into
the
exit-alcove
-and
immediately, someone stabbed me

from behind. I lost consciousness.
Vandiya Devan must have been
waiting outside, after somehow
knowing that I would come out
there."
"No, Sir! Your surmise is
completely wrong. I don’t think he
waited outside."
"You too have joined his party!"
"Why should I join his party?
What do I gain by that? Or, what
does he gain by that? I think, I
know what must have happened..."
"Tell me My Lady. Explain it to
me."
"Vandiya Devan was not waiting
outside the fort..."
"Then, who was waiting?" asked
Kandamaran, without any patience.

"Nobody. All I said was, Vandiya
Devan was not waiting outside the
fort. He must have been waiting
inside that secret passage-way."
"What?! How could that be
possible?"
"That day, he vanished like a
magician. How could he vanish?
Think about it -- somehow Vandiya
Devan managed to enter the
treasure vault and find out all the
secrets
of
the
underground
chamber and its passages. He must
have followed you in there. When
the exit-alcove opened, he struck
you from behind and escaped
through the same door. After that
his conscience must have pricked
him. He carried you to that mutewoman’s house before he ran
away."

"It must have happened just like
you describe it! I have no doubts
now. All these days, my intellect did
not recognize it. No one else
realized it. If anyone asks who is
the most intelligent person in this
nation,
I’ll
say
without
any
hesitation, it is you! There are
intelligent people; and beautiful
people. It is rare that one finds
both qualities in one creation. You
have both -- intelligence and
beauty!" Kandamaran prattled with
passion.
"Sir! Are you saying all this from
the bottom of your heart? Are you
merely flattering me like common
men do with unfamiliar women."
"This is no flattery. I promise
that I speak what my heart feels."

"So, you trust me completely?
Will you trust me and help me with
something?"
"I am ready to do whatever I can."
"You must journey to Kanchi on my behalf."
"I can go to Kasi on the banks of the Ganga if you
want!"
"You needn’t go that far. I shall give you a letter
addressed to Prince Aditya Karikala in Kanchi. You must
deliver it to him and then you must invite him to be your
guest in your house at Kadamboor."

"My Lady! Do you know what
you are saying? Are you not aware
of the arrangements being made
about this Empire by your husband,
my father and other chieftains of
this Kingdom?"
"I am fully aware of that. In fact,
I know more secrets. Your family,
my
family
and
some
other
important families in this country
are about to face some grave
dangers. Do you know who is
behind that trouble?"

"Tell me My Lady!"
"She who came to visit you in my
house. That witch."
"Oh dear! Do you mean the
Younger Pirati Kundavai Devi?"
asked Kandamaran with some
confusion.
"Yes. I mean that poisonous snake. One snake knows
another. This Nandini knows the tricks and intrigues of
Kundavai. She has sent your friend Vandiya Devan to
Lanka. Do you know why? Collecting medicines is utter
falsehood. She is not anxious that Sundara Chozla should
survive. After him, neither Madurandaka nor Karikala
should ascend the throne. Her wish is that her beloved
younger brother Arulmozli should be crowned. If Arulmozli
ascends the Chozla throne, she can rule him as she wishes.
After that, Kundavai Devi is the Empress of the Chozla
Empire! Do you know who will be Emperor? Your dear
friend Vandiya Devan...."
"Oh! Is that possible? It must be stopped at all costs.
We must inform my father and Lord Pazluvoor as soon as
possible."
"There is no use in telling them. They won’t believe us.
We must overcome Kundavai’s tricks with cunning. If you
help me, we can do that."
"Order me, Dear Lady!"
"Here, carry this letter, as carefully as you can and
deliver it to the Prince in Kanchi. Can you do that?" Saying
this, she extended her hand to give him the casket-tube of

letters. Kandamaran who was completely ensnared in a net
of passion lost his senses and grabbed her hand instead of
taking the tube of letters. "I will do anything for you!" he
babbled.
In that moment, a crunching noise was heard. Lord
Pazluvoor was hurrying down the path that connected his
mansion with the garden gazebo. The servant maid who
was surprised by his sudden arrival ran aside. A parrot,
bound by a chain, was perched on a metal triangle
suspended near the doorway of the gazebo. In his hurry,
without really being aware of it, Lord Pazluvoor had
grabbed the parrot in his palm. The rage in his heart flowed
through his hand: the bird flapped its wings in fright; the
squeezing grip made the parrot screech!
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 24 --Wax In Embers

The
sound
made
by
the
screeching parrot mingled with a
fear laden cry of the servant girl
and startled both Nandini and
Kandamaran. When he turned
around to find Lord Pazluvoor at
the entryway, Kandamaran was
completely rattled. He wondered if
the old man would have heard the
declarations he had just made;
particularly the words, `I too do not
like
Lord
Pazluvoor.’
More
terrifying was the thought that he
might misunderstand the intimacy
between him and Nandini. He was
petrified! Old men who married
young girls were peculiar and
suspicious. Was that the cause for
the rage on his face? What will he
do? I must be prepared for
anything.

Such thoughts raced through
Kandamaran’s mind in a flash.
However, on that day he had the
opportunity to witness a most
astonishing scene. The amazing
scene happened contrary to all his
expectations.
When Lord Pazluvoor stepped
inside the gazebo, Nandini turned
to him and smiled, blinking her
large, dark eyes. She said, "My
Lord! I was concerned that you
may be delayed much longer in
your journey. Fortunately, you have
come back."
On looking at her and hearing her voice, Lord
Pazluvoor’s anger vanished. He melted like wax thrown
upon burning embers. He laughed a foolish laugh and said,
"Yes; my job was done; I came back." He then looked at
Kandamaran, "What is this young fellow doing here? Is he
composing love poems for you?" After asking this, he
laughed at his own joke.
Kandamaran’s face became red. Nandini laughed
louder than Lord Pazluvoor and said, "He knows nothing
about love or poetry. The only thing he knows is to fight and

be wounded. Luckily, his wound is now healed. He was
talking about returning home."
"What can one say about the bravery of modern youth!
I have participated in more than twenty-four campaigns
and have borne more than sixty wounds. I had never taken
to a sickbed. He needed more than half a month to heal his
single wound. But all my wounds were on my shoulders,
face, chest, and head. This youth was wounded on his back!
That’s why it took so many days -- it’s justified" He laughed
mockingly.
Kandamaran was enraged, "Sir, you are akin to my
father. I tolerate your teasing insults because of that."
"Really! What can you do otherwise, boy?" asked Lord
Pazluvoor as his hand sought the hilt of the sword by his
waist.
Nandini intervened, "My Lord, his wound in not merely
physical. You are aware that his heart is also injured. The
thought that a man he had considered a dearest friend
could stab him like this on his back, wounded his heart. The
physical wound had healed but the pain in his heart is still
alive. We shouldn’t hurt him further by our words. That
night -- the night he was wounded -- Don’t you remember
what happened that night, Sir?" Nandini looked up into
Lord Pazluvoor’s eyes with a meaningful stare. Lord
Pazluvoor’s appearance was transformed.
"Yes; you are correct. He is an ignorant youth and his
father is my dear friend. I should not be perturbed by his
foolish remarks. Forget that. Nandini, I came here to give
you some important news. He can also hear it. I believe a
man has been arrested on suspicion as a spy at Mattotam in
Lanka. Apparently, he had a sealed letter addressed to
Arulmozli. Based on the descriptions, I think it could be this
man’s dearest friend. That fellow must be really capable.
See how he escaped our men and landed in Lanka."

Both men did not see the expression that flashed
across Nandini’s face for one second.
Kandamaran asked with some disappointment, "Did he
escape? Has he gone to Lanka?"
"My Lord, I am not surprised about his escaping to
Lanka. I have told you many times that your brother does
not have the capability to command this fort. His men are
just like him!" said Nandini.
"When you said that about him, I was not ready to
believe you. Now, I am beginning to agree. Listen to
another odd story. Apparently, a signet ring with our
Pazluvoor symbol was found in the possession of the spy
arrested at Mattotam. He refused to reveal anything about
how he came to possess that signet ring..."
Nandini sighed lightly, "How odd! How did he get our
palmtree signet? What does your brother say about it?"
"He… If you hear what he said, you will laugh.
Kalanthaka says that the signet ring must have gone to the
spy from you." Upon saying this, Lord Pazluvoor laughed a
thundering laugh. Bushes trembled and the gazebo shook.
Nandini joined in his laughter, "There is nobody as
sharp-witted as my brother-in-law in the whole universe!"
"Do you know what else he said, your brother-in-law?
It is even more funny! He said that once while you were
outside Tanjavur Fort in your palanquin, you met that
handsome youngster; that charming young man had even
come to this palace! So, you must have personally given our
signet ring to that young spy. If not, it must have been
given through that Sorcerer who comes to meet you so
often. My brother tells me all these imaginary tales to hide
his mistakes!" Lord Pazluvoor continued to laugh noisily.
"I should not cast aspersions on your brother’s
intellect. It is definitely as good as leaf buds on a pounding

block. I am surprised that you kept quiet, listening to all
these accusations." Her facial expression had changed once
again; anger made her lips tremble and eyes sparkle with
embers.
Lord Pazluvoor was one of the bravest men on earth,
who had faced many lances and swords on the battle field;
he could not handle this petty anger of Nandini. His
posture and words seemed vulnerable. "My Dear, did you
think I was listening to him passively? I scolded him for his
incompetence and almost reduced him to tears. Even you
would have felt sorry for him, if you had seen him."
Kandamaran who was listening to this interchange felt
very uncomfortable. He was filled with a certain fear about
Nandini and a certain pity and contempt for Lord
Pazluvoor. He wished to leave before getting involved in
this tiff between husband and wife. He cleared his throat
and said, "Sir!"
Nandini looked around, "In talking about the talents of
your brother, we completely forgot this young gentleman.
He says that he wants to go home, can he go?"
"He is welcome. His father must be worried that he
stayed back in Tanjavur for such a long time."
"I wish to send a letter with him. May I do that?"
"What letter? For whom?"
"To the Prince in Kanchi."
Lord Pazluvoor looked at both Nandini and
Kandamaran with distrust and asked, "A letter for the
Prince! From you? Why?"
"The Younger Pirati has written a letter to her younger
brother and sent it through his friend. Why shouldn’t the
Young-Queen of Pazluvoor write a letter to the elder
brother and send it through him?" asked Nandini.

"Was that letter carried by his friend written by
Kundavai Pirati? How did you know this?" asked Lord
Pazluvoor.
"Why do you think I consult the Sorcerer so often? I
found out by his spells. You are aware of the competence of
your brother’s men. Look at this, they found out and
reported that the spy had our signet ring; but they did not
report that the letter was sent by Kundavai."
"Our men did not bring the report about the signet
ring. Anbil Brahma-raya has just returned from
Rameswaram. He brought that news."
"At least, did that brahmin tell you about Kundavai’s
letter?"
"No!"
"My Lord! You must take heed of my warnings. Every
official in this Empire is gathering together and scheming
against you. You must realize the truth now! I am not
saying things just because of revelations by the Sorcerer. I
summoned the Doctor’s son who was arrested at Kodi Karai
and brought here, and questioned him in detail. He
confirmed the news that Kundavai had sent the letter to her
brother."
Lord Pazluvoor felt lost, as if someone had bound his
eyes and left him in a pathless forest. He was looking at
Kandamaran with irritation. He did not like to discuss such
secrets in front of the youngster. Nandini recognized the
cause for this irritation. "There is no end to our story. Why
should this man’s journey be delayed?" She turned to
Kandamaran, "Sir! Please deliver this letter directly to the
Prince at Kanchi. After delivering this letter, if he gives any
letter in reply, you must make arrangements to forward it
carefully to me. Don’t forget to invite the Prince to your
fortress at Kadamboor."

"What should I tell my father? May I say that this is
approved by the Lord of Pazluvoor?" asked Kandamaran
with some hesitation.
"You can say that without any qualms. My wish is Lord
Pazluvoor’s will. Am I correct My Lord?" asked Nandini.
"Yes; yes." Lord Pazluvoor shook his head though he
understood nothing. He was confused and he could not say
anything against Nandini’s wishes.
After
Kandamaran
left,
Nandini
turned
her
mesmerizing eyes on Lord Pazluvoor. She spoke with a
honey sweet voice, "My Dear Lord! I think you have lost
your trust in me. My brother-in-law’s jealous slander has
won."
"Never Nandini, never! I might loose trust in my sword
and in my spear. But I will not distrust you. I might loose
faith in the heavens meant for the brave, but I shall never
loose faith in you."
"Then, why did you question me like that in front of
that youth? I felt so disgraced!" Tears filled her eyes as she
said this.
Lord Pazluvoor was bewildered, "Don’t My Darling!
Don’t punish me like this!" He wiped her tears with his
scarf and picked up her hands, consoling her with mumbled
words. "But I do not understand some of your actions. Don’t
I have a right to ask why or what?"
"You have that right; it is my duty to reply. Who denied
that? All I ask is that you should not question me in front of
strangers. Now that we are alone, ask me whatever you
want."
"Why are you writing to Aditya Karikala? Why did you
want him to be invited to Kadamboor? Is he not the first
enemy to our plans?"

"No. Aditya Karikala is not our first enemy. That snake
from Pazlayarai is our first enemy. I invited her to our
house for a reason; I am writing to Karikala and inviting
him to Kadamboor for that same reason. My Lord! Try and
recall what I have said several times. I have told you that
Younger Pirati Kundavai has some unique secret plan. I
have found out that secret. She is determined to discard
the claims of everybody and place her darling Arulmozli on
this throne at Tanjavur. That is why she has sent a
messenger to Lanka. That is why she has come to Tanjavur.
We must destroy her plans with counter schemes. Now, do
you understand why I am sending the letter to Kanchi?"
Nandini’s questioning gaze confused Lord Pazluvoor’s
intellect completely.
He mumbled incoherently, "Yes, I understand," though
he understood nothing.
"My Lord, this Empire has grown in greatness and
power because of the service by you and your forefathers. I
cannot sleep even a wink, by night or day, till I have placed
you on the golden throne of this Empire. Until that day, if
you suspect me or distrust me for any reason, please kill
me with one stroke of your sword."
"My Darling, do not torture me with such horrible
orders!" said Lord Pazluvoor.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 25 --The City Of Mattotam
It has been some time since we parted company from
Vandiya Devan, the hero of this tale. We have tarried too
long in Tanjavur City. During this time, our friend Vandiya
Devan had walked along the north-west coast of Lanka and
reached the great City of Mattotam on the banks of River
Palavi. The city, situated on the seashore across the
channel from Rameswaram, was pleasing to the eyes with
tall trees and green gardens. The coast was lush with
groves of mango, jack, coconut, palmyra, areca, plantain,
and sugarcane. Monkeys played on treetops; bees hummed
symphonies and parrots spoke baby-talk.
Sea waves dashed against the city’s fortress walls and
raised a roaring murmur. The harbor was filled with large
ships and small craft. Goods from such vessels was piled in
mounds on the waterfront. There were many changes since
the times of Saints Sambanda and Sundara Murti. Now, the
streets of Mattotam were not filled with many pilgrims
going to the temple of Lord Kedeswara. Soldiers bearing
shield and sword, men carrying sharp spears now
wandered the by-ways and lanes which used to be filled
with the devout who delighted in singing the Lord’s
praises.
In the past hundred years, the city had more or less
transformed into a center for war. Armies coming for the
Lankan war from the Tamil country landed at that port.
Returning forces usually embarked from the same harbor.
The city had changed hands several times. It used to be
under the control of Lanka’s Singhalese Kings for a while
and later under Pandiya command. Since Paranthaka’s
times it was in the hands of Chozla forces.
Vandiya Devan arrived at the gates of this fort that was
the headquarters for various army campaigns. He told the
guards that he wished to enter the fort. The soldiers

refused entry. Therefore, he tried the trick which he had
used in Kadamboor long ago: he tried to surprise the
guards and fight his way into the fort. But these soldiers
arrested him and took him before their captain. Vandiya
Devan told that captain, that he was carrying important
letters for Prince Arulmozli and he could discuss more
details only with the Chozla Commander. They searched his
person and belongings and found a sealed letter-roll
addressed to Ponniyin Selvan, with some covering letters
for safe passage and also a signet ring with the palmtree
emblem of Pazluvoor.
At that time, the Elder Lord Velir, Bhoothi Vikrama
Kesari of Kodumbalur was the Commander of the Chozla
forces in Lanka. The Captain of Mattotam reported the
incident to him. Commander Bhoothi Vikrama was in
conference with Prime Minister Anirudda Brahma-raya. He
had been intending to go up to Rameswaram with the
Prime Minister. Therefore, he said that would make
enquiries after coming back from the mainland; the man
was to be placed under guard till his return.
The Captain led Vandiya Devan to a mansion in
disrepair and locked him up in one of its rooms. Vandiya
Devan was tired by his long journey. In a way he was happy
about being arrested. Perhaps he could get a day or two of
rest from travel! On the first day he was able to enjoy such
a rest. But on the second day, a nuisance appeared.
He began hearing most peculiar noises from the next
room. Some fellow was threatening another; his brave
threats were quite remarkable! "Here you!" "Get lost!"
"Don’t move, don’t come near!" "Chee!" "I’ll kill you if you
move!" "Careful, I’ll smash you up!" "Your life is not yours!
You will surely enter the world of death!" Some fellow was
shouting in this fashion in the next room. The recipient of
these threats did not reveal himself. There was no voice of
reply. Vandiya Devan wondered if it could be some soldier

who had gone mad. Oh Dear! Is he going to ruin my night’s
sleep? Even this little rest is threatened!
"Won’t you listen? You won’t go away! Fine, see what
I’ll do to you!" A few seconds after these words, a small
bundle fell `thud’ in his room. Vandiya Devan who had been
lying down, sat up with a startle. He peered at the bundle
that had fallen in his room. He could not control his
laughter and laughed merrily. The bundle thrown from the
next room was a cat!
"Oh! You can even laugh! Laugh as much as you want
but don’t come back!" said the voice from the next room.
Some mad fellow; no doubt about that! Who else will
argue with a cat? Who else will think that a cat could
laugh? Nonetheless, the voice seems vaguely familiar. I
have heard it somewhere, sometime ago -- who could it be?
Let me think.
Vandiya Devan went back to his corner to lie down. He
closed his eyes and tried to sleep. Something tickled his
toes. It was the cat -- nuzzling against his feet! Oh Lord!
How am I to sleep with this bedfellow? He pushed it away
and closed his eyes once more. Something touched his
palms softly. The cat was purring by his side! He pushed it
away once more, firmly. The cat walked away to the
opposite corner. He rolled around and tried to go back to
sleep. The cat came back to sit by his head and gently
caress his face with its tail.
Vandiya Devan, who had bravely borne the sharp touch
of arrows and swords could not bear this caress from the
cat! He sat up and picked up the cat by its neck. There was
a gaping hole at the top of the wall that separated his room
from the next. He threw the cat into that hole made by
fallen bricks. It was total commotion in the next room for
some minutes. A man’s enraged cries mingled with the
caterwauling yells of the cat. Finally, "Get lost! Go!" said

the man. Meowing cries from the cat could be heard for a
while. Then silence. Vandiya Devan went to sleep. -- A
pleasant dream: Kundavai Pirati was sitting by his side and
caressing his face. What a difference between the cat’s tail
and the Princess’s gentle fingers! -- He woke up with a start
and felt dejected that the dream had ended.
Someone was gently rapping on the wall from the next
room. It must be that mad man.
"Who is that? Who threw the cat in here?"
Vandiya Devan did not reply. He kept quiet and
listened. A scratching sound like the cat. No. It was
someone on the other side, trying to pry the bricks from the
hole on the wall. Vandiya Devan listened without getting
up. As a precaution his hand grabbed the knife by his side.
Two hands emerged from the hole on top of the wall.
Then a turbaned head appeared. The face peered into his
room. Aha! Isn’t he Azlvar-adiyan Nambi? He looked
different with the turban; but it is him! Why has this fellow
appeared here? How did he come here? Did he know that I
was here? Is he going to help, or hinder?
Vandiya Devan called out, "Dear Mr. Nambi of the
Vaishnava faith! Welcome! Welcome to this holy city of the
Saiva shrine of Lord Kedeswara! Welcome!"
"Thambi, is it you? I should have guessed! Who else can
sit quiet as a mouse like this?" Azlvar-adiyan jumped into
the room.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 26 --A Sword That Wanted Blood
Vandiya Devan felt disquiet about how and why that
fanatic Vaishnava had come there. He did not reveal his
fears. "What a coincidence! I was just thinking about you. I
look up and you jump down the wall! The saying, `Good
fortune will come pouring down the roof!’ must be true."
"Dear Man! Were you thinking of me? Why? Why did
you think of this mortal human being? There would have
been some use if you had contemplated on the good Lord
Rama..."
"I must really compliment you on your intuition; I was
really thinking of Lord Rama. I could glimpse at the towers
of Rameswaram Temple across the sea when I came here. I
was thinking about Rama praying to Shiva in that holy town
to atone for the sin of killing Ravana."
"Stop! Stop this immediately."
"No, Sir! No! I cannot! I have been quiet too long. My
legs ache because of walking miles and miles along this
coast. I am tired. Please sit down and listen. Like I told you,
I was thinking of Lord Rama; I also remembered his devout
disciple, Hanuman the monkey. When I thought of
Hanuman, I remembered you! Just then, you jumped into
this room! Did you merely jump across this wall or did you
also leap across the sea like Hanuman the monkey?" asked
Vandiya Devan.
"Thambi, Hanuman is the best among the devout. Don’t
compare me with him. When Hanuman came to Lanka, he
killed heroes like Akshaya and other demons. I could not
handle a simple cat! See how the cat scratched me and
wounded me." Azlvar-adiyan pointed out his bleeding limbs.
"Oh Dear! Is that what happened? But why did you
pick a fight with a mere cat?"

"I did not pick a fight. The cat came and picked a
quarrel with me."
"How was that, Sir?"
"I came in search of you. I fooled the gatekeeper of
this mansion and leaped across the garden wall. That
foolish cat was deliberately sunning itself at the exact spot
where I placed my legs! My foot merely touched its tail, but
that ferocious cat attacked me with its claws. Thambi,
listen to this: one can fight a tiger easily or even handle a
rogue elephant. But one should never tussle with a cat,"
advised Azlvar-adiyan Nambi.
"Mr. Nambi, I know a secret..."
"What secret?"
"That cat had come here also, to visit me in this room.
It caressed my forehead with its tail and nuzzled against
my hands lovingly. It did not scratch me! But it has
attacked you. Do you know why? Because, it is a devout
Saiva cat that does not like fanatic followers of Vishnu."
"Really? I did not think of that! If I had known that it
was a foolish Saiva cat, I would have served it some
hallowed hits with my staff."
"It’s good that you did not bring your staff. Because,
since stepping into this city, my blood has begun to boil
with fanatic Saiva zeal. This sword in my scabbard has
been begging for the blood of a fanatic Vaishnava. I’m
controlling its urge because of the help you rendered me."
"Thambi, I don’t remember helping you."
"Sir, didn’t you tell me about your sister, Nandini Devi
of Pazluvoor?"
"Yes; I had told you about her."
"Remember, you pointed her out when she was in her
covered palanquin near Kadamboor and when she parted

the curtains..."
"Yes. So what?"
"Listen. I saw that palanquin once again outside
Tanjavur Fort. The palanquin bearers came and deliberately
dashed against my horse. I cried for justice and parted the
curtains of that palanquin."
"Who was inside?"
"The Young-Queen of Pazluvoor, Nandini Devi herself!"
"You are lucky. Though I have tried several times, I
have not been able to meet Nandini. You managed it
somehow."
"Good fortune strikes unexpectedly, like that!"
"Then?"
"I mentioned your name. I told her that you had sent a
very important message for her."
"Thambi, I have seen several fellows; but never one for
uttering lies like you."
"Sir, my ancestors were very fond of poets and bards.
In fact many of them had composed poems..."
"What about that, now?"
"The blood of my poetic ancestors flows in my veins
also. My imagination blooms and thrives sometimes.
Commoners like you think that my creativity is lies."
"Fantastic! What happened with Nandini?"
"Nandini Devi was very pleased with my imagination
and creativity. She presented a beautiful ivory ring to honor
me. She even invited me to come and visit her in her
palace."
"Did you?"

"Why not? I visited her immediately. Nandini Devi was
made aware of my brave, courageous, dauntless gallantry
by announcements made by my own capable self. Being
impressed, she assigned an important task for me."
"What task?"
"Apparently, the Crown Jewels of Madurai Pandiyas
are hidden somewhere in the mountains of this Lanka. She
ordered me to somehow find those jewels and bring them
to her! I did not realize that it was such a difficult task."
"People say that the jewels in Lord Pazluvoor’s
treasury can equal a thousand donkey-loads. All that is not
enough for his Young-Queen. How is she going to reward
you for bringing the Pandiya jewels?"
"She promised to dismiss Lord Kalanthaka from his
duties as Commander of Tanjavur and give that job to me."
"Very good Thambi. If you get the Command of Tanjavur,
I will have permission to enter and leave Tanjavur Fort
without any questions, won’t I?"
"Absolutely! But how am I to get that Command? I
have been locked up like this, in this city." Vandiya Devan
spoke with some dejection.
"Why did you get caught? Why have they locked you
up? Do you know?"
"I was carrying the signet ring given by the YoungQueen of Pazluvoor. I thought that it may have magical
powers in this city also. It was a mistake," said Vandiya
Devan.
"Yes, it was a humongous mistake. Here, the
Commander is the Elder Lord of Kodumbalur. Don’t you
know about the bitter rivalry between the clans of
Kodumbalur and Pazluvoor?"
"I did not know that! I was caught and I do not know
what to do..."

"Thambi, don’t worry."
"How can I not worry?"
"I have come here to free you."
"Really!"
"Once upon a time I asked you to help me and you
refused. But I am going to help you. Get up and come with
me. Let us escape from this prison immediately."
"Mr. Nambi, I suggest that you leave this room as soon
as possible."
"Why, Thambi?"
"My sword has begun to cry again, `I want the blood of
this fanatic Vaishnava!’ it says."
"Let it cry. I have plenty of blood in my veins. Let your
sword drink its fill. You come with me."
"No, I cannot come."
"Why not?"
"I am very sleepy; I have not slept for several nights. I
have decided to sleep well tonight. That’s why I threw the
cat away."
"Thambi, why do you talk foolishly like this? Is this
how you are going to accomplish the task that Kundavai
assigned? Did you not agree to travel by day and night,
without rest, till you deliver the letter to Ponniyin Selvan?"
Azlvar-adiyan now unbound his scarf and handed the roll of
letters and some other things to Vandiya Devan.
Vandiya Devan accepted them eagerly. He had decided
that Nambi was trying to trick him with cunning and learn
his secrets by foolish chatter. He changed his opinion. "Mr.
Nambi, how did you get these?"
"Commander Bhoothi Vikrama gave them to me. He
asked me to return this Pazluvoor signet ring also. We can

leave on a journey whenever you are ready."
"Sir, I submit my heartfelt thanks."
"Keep your thanks to yourself. You can give them to me
at another time."
"Sir, do
Arulmozli?"

you

know

the

whereabouts

of

Prince

"No one knows that. He has gone to the mountain
country from Anuradhapura. We have to find him. The
Commander has ordered me to go with you as your guide.
I’ll come if you agree."
Vandiya Devan became suspicious once again, "Mr.
Nambi, I would like to meet the Commander before we
leave."
"Surely. We can leave only after you meet the
Commander. We cannot leave before you have given him
news of Lady Vanathi Devi!"
On hearing these words, Vandiya Devan wondered if
that religious fanatic was also a dabbler in magic or
sorcery.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 27 --Forest Path
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari, the Elder Lord
Velir of Kodumbalur was an elderly, experienced warhorse.
He had personal experience of conducting numberless war
campaigns in varied conditions. He enjoyed a close, friendly
alliance with the Chozla clan. His younger brother had
reached the heavens of the brave, as the result of a loosing
war fought in Lanka some years ago. The armies sent with
that younger brother had faced defeat and retreat.
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama was very intent on
vindicating that slur to the name of the Velirs and
reestablishing the brave fame of the Kodumbalur house.
Therefore, he had come to Lanka as the Commander
though he was slightly advanced in age.
For reasons of his own, Lord Pazluvoor had been
raising several obstacles to the proper conduct of this
campaign on the island of Lanka. The long time rivalry and
competition between the clans of these two Tamil chieftains
had now grown because of these disagreements.
The plight of Vandiya Devan, who had been arrested
with the Pazluvoor signet ring in his possession, would
indeed have been difficult if he had been brought before
the Velir chieftain.
Fortunately for our hero, the
Commander had mentioned the incident to Prime Minister
Brahma-raya while enroute to Rameswaram. The Prime
Minister came to know the truth about Vandiya Devan
through Azlvar-adiyan and acted at once. He ordered
Azlvar-adiyan to cross the channel immediately and explain
the truth to Commander Bhoothi Vikrama.
The Commander examined the brave young man of the
Vaanar clan from top to toe. He must have been favorably
impressed. He enquired in a pleasant voice, "Thambi, did
they look after you properly? Did you have comfortable
lodging and proper food?"

"Yes Sir! There was no dearth of comfort. They looked
after me very well indeed! Five or six men waited
constantly at my door to execute my every wish and order. I
had plenty of space to stay in that old mansion. They had
even sent me a cat for my night meal. Just when I was
about to eat that creature, this Mr. Nambi appeared to spoil
my appetite!" spoke Vandiya Devan.
"This young man seems to be a jokester. Thirumalai, is
he speaking the truth?"
Azlvar-adiyan Thirumalai Nambi replied, "Sir, he says
that his forefathers were poets. Therefore, he possesses a
lot of creative imagination. Apart from that, he is
essentially saying the truth. When I went to see him in the
guard-house, a cat really scratched my arms and legs."
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama began to laugh on seeing
the bloody scratches on his hands and legs. "A cat did this
to you!? You are lucky to have this brave young man as
your companion for the journey across the forest ..."
"Sir, I have no need for an escort; my wooden staff
would be adequate. It was a mistake to not take my staff
with me when I went to see him."
"Then, you can be his escort. Arrange for a proper
meal for him before you leave. Thambi, food services are
somewhat inadequate in Lanka at present. Mahinda’s
armies had destroyed all the irrigation canals and lakes in
these provinces before they retreated into the mountains.
Agriculture and farming are greatly inhibited because of it.
Neither do we have farmers to plant crops. Even the local
population is on the verge of starvation; how can I
commandeer food for our soldiers? We do not get proper
food supplies from the homeland..."
"I am aware of that Sir!" interrupted Vandiya Devan, "I
heard the women petition the Younger Pirati Kundavai
when she was in the vicinity of the padai veedu

neighborhood in Pazlayarai. They were imploring, `Our
husbands and sons are starving in Lanka!’ The Princess
was concerned."
"Oh, they are aware of this situation over there? Good,
good! What did Kundavai Pirati say to their appeal?"
"She consoled them with words to the effect that our
men in Lanka will not suffer as long as Commander Bhoothi
Vikrama was there to take care of them. They need not
worry when Lord Velir was in command."
"Aha! Did the Younger Pirati say such words? There
have been many noble women born in various noble
families of this world; but there is none to equal our
Younger Pirati!"
"There is another we could mention, Sir."
"Who is that, Thambi?"
"Lady Vanathi Devi of Kodumbalur."
"Ah! This young man is very ingenious. His creativity
will seduce even me. Thambi, did you see the light of our
clan at Pazlayarai?"
"I met her Sir. How could I not see her when she is the
constant companion of the Younger Pirati? They came to
the Doctor’s house, riding on an elephant. The Younger
Pirati and Lady Vanathi are never separated -- like the light
from a lamp, fragrance from flowers, shadow of a figure..."
"Really! This young man is very smart. Thirumalai,
before you leave, take him to our treasury and give him all
the clothes and ornaments he likes."
"Sir. I have no wish for clothes or ornaments now. I’ll
accept them on my return journey when my assignment is
completed." Vandiya Devan bowed to the Commander in
thanks.

"Thambi, did the Princess send any message for me
about the darling of my clan, about Vanathi?"
"Commander, I do not wish to utter lies in your
presence."
"Never speak falsehood anywhere to anyone."
"I beg to be excused in that matter as far as this
fanatic Mr. Nambi is concerned. If I tell him the truth my
head will split into smithereens!" said Vandiya Devan.
"Fine, fine! So? The Younger Pirati did not send any
message for me!" The Commander seemed slightly
disappointed.
"She did not send a message for you. But..."
"But what?"
"She has sent a message to the concerned person. She
has ordered me to personally deliver some messages about
Lady Vanathi to the Prince."
"I have never met a youngster as intelligent as you!"
With these words the Elder Lord of Kodumbalur heartily
embraced Vandiya Devan. He then said, "Well, don’t waste
time anymore. You must leave as soon as possible."
Vandiya Devan asked a little hesitantly, "Sir, does this
Vaishnava gentleman have to accompany me? Can I not
leave without him?"
"Why do you object to him coming with you?"
"I have no objection. This sword by my waist is a
fanatic Saiva sword. For some days now, it has been
begging for Vaishnava blood. It might emerge from my
scabbard without my control and his lot may become
difficult. I am concerned about that!" Vandiya Devan
replied in an obscure fashion expressing his dissatisfaction
about the arrangement.

"Then leave this bloodthirsty sword here; take some
other sword from our armory. You may not be able to find
Prince Arulmozli if Thirumalai does not come with you. No
one knows the whereabouts of the Prince. Moreover, he is
also carrying an important letter for the Prince. It is better
that you both journey together. Don’t you both indulge in
petty quarrels with each other on the way and spoil the
mission." The Commander appeared quite firm.
After saying this, Lord Velir led Vandiya Devan aside
and whispered these words in his ear, "Thambi, this fellow
will not hinder your mission. But be careful; find out what
message he delivers to the Prince and come back and tell
me."
In the beginning Vandiya Devan was concerned that
Azlvar-adiyan was being sent to keep an eye on him. Now,
the roles were reversed; he was going to keep an eye on
that cunning Vaishnava spy. Vandiya Devan preferred this
situation.
Vandiya Devan and Azlvar-adiyan Nambi left by
nightfall with an escort of two footmen. For two days, they
journeyed eastward. For a while the landscape was
populated with townships and villages. To a certain extent,
people seemed to be moving about on their normal tasks.
Soon, the terrain changed to encroaching forest with short
trees and shrubs. Later, the jungle grew thick with tall
trees reaching sky high; small lakes could be seen in
enclosed clearings. Such lakes and tanks were often ruined
with broken dikes and banks. Water had wastefully escaped
through ruined channels and lakes were dry. Farmlands lay
fallow. In one large open meadow, water stagnated for a
depth of few inches. Apparently, water from River Paalaavi
had flooded the area because of ruined banks and wasted
the land as well as water. They saw all such sights as they
walked.

Azlvar-adiyan repeatedly pointed out the havoc and
ruin caused by long time war in those beautiful and fertile
lands. He spoke constantly of the evils of war. He and
Vandiya Devan argued constantly about this topic. After
two days, the journey changed direction. They now bent
their steps southward. Forests became even more dense.
Plains turned into rocky, hilly land. In the distance they
could see tall mountain ranges. Forests began to appear
dangerous as birdsounds mingled with frightening noises of
unknown beasts. They were talking about the wild beasts
and the danger from them in those areas. Thirumalai said
that jackals, panthers, tigers, cheetahs, bears, elephants
and other such wild animals could be found in that forest.
Vandiya Devan asked, "Isn’t it dangerous if a pack of
jackals come at us?" He remembered that horrible
nightmare he had in Kadamboor.
"The howl of a single jackal is more dangerous than a
pack of jackals."
"How can that be, Sir?"
"Cheetah and jackal hunt together in these forests.
The cheetah hides in shadows while the jackal scouts for
prey in the open. If it sees a living prey -- a deer, or even a
human being -- it sets up a long howl. The cheetah pounces
swiftly and kills the prey. A jackal which scouts for the
cheetah in this fashion is often called as `Ori’ the spy."
While they talked in this fashion and walked, they
could hear a roaring sound, like sea waves, in the distance.
Vandiya Devan asked, "Have we not come far from the sea?
What is that noise?"
"Some lake or reservoir must be close by. An elephant
herd must be coming to drink water..." Nambi was
explaining.

"Oh Dear Lord! What if we are caught in the midst of
that elephant herd?"
"There is nothing to worry about that. Elephants
coming in a large herd will not harm us. If we stand aside,
they will go their way without even glancing at us." Azlvaradiyan and the others had stopped under a tree. A footman
quickly climbed the towering forest tree and looked out. He
cried out as he hastily scrambled down, "Sir, Sir! It is a
single elephant. A rogue! It is pulling out trees and
breaking branches and coming this way."
"Oh! What a complication! How are we to escape
this?" Thirumalai looked about here and there in fear.
Vandiya Devan asked, "You said that there was nothing
to fear about a herd of wild elephants. Now you are afraid
of a single elephant -- why Sir?"
"My Dear Man! A single rogue elephant is like a
thousand wild elephants. No one can withstand its fury."
"We three men have spears and swords. You have your
staff!"
"A thousand spears can do nothing to a rogue
elephant. There, look at that steep rockface. If we climb
onto that ledge we may be able to escape. Come, let us run
and try."
Azlvar-adiyan was already running towards that rocky
hillock. Others followed. After they had run a few yards,
they realized that a deep canyon crossed their path. They
ran up to stand on the edge of that steep ravine. The
elephant seemed to be approaching closer. When that huge
beast lifted its long trunk and trumpeted, the thundering
roar reverberated from all sides. On hearing its screaming
roar, all four men began to run helter-skelter in all
directions.

The elephant had come closer; it came even closer and
closer. It seemed to be aiming for Azlvar-adiyan and going
towards the spot he stood. If he took two steps backwards,
Azlvar-adiyan would fall into that deep ravine. Bushes and
shrubs obstructed and prevented escape on the sides.
Anyway, how could he run and escape a rogue elephant?
Vandiya Devan raised his spear and took aim. He felt
that even thunderbolts from heaven could not stop that
beast in that moment. His hand, lifting the spear, felt weak.
Azlvar-adiyan’s actions at that time provoked laughter on
one side.

Azlvar-adiyan was waving his
wooden staff and shouting at the
rogue elephant, "Stop, stop! Stop
right there! You are ruined if you
come closer! I shall kill you and
bury you alive. Take care! Stop
right now!"
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 28 --Royal Way
How could a rogue elephant be stopped by the threats
of Azlvar-adiyan’s staff and passionate words? It lifted its
trunk high above the head and trampled the bushes and
creepers on its path as it came closer. There was no doubt
that in one second, Azlvar-adiyan’s life-story would come to
an end. The two footmen stood rooted to their spot as they
shouted "Hey" "Hey". Vandiya Devan lifted his spear once
again thinking of making one last effort. In that same
instant, Azlvar-adiyan threw his wooden staff at that
elephant. The next moment, Azlvar-adiyan vanished. His
head scarf flew into the breeze and was caught by a tree
branch. Before they could worry about Azlvar-adiyan’s
plight, an important thing occurred in that forest.
The elephant stepped closer to the spot where Azlvaradiyan had vanished; suddenly, the beast bent its forelegs,
as if it was kneeling down -- and toppled forward! A
deafening roar was echoing from all directions of that
forest ravine. In one second, that mountain-like elephant
also disappeared. As its huge body rolled down and down
that ravine, the rogue elephant raised a cloud of dust
caused by dislodged rocks and stones.
Vandiya Devan needed a few minutes to understand
what had happened. There was that deep canyon -- the
ravine just behind Azlvar-adiyan; in the force of throwing
his staff the man had fallen into it! The rogue elephant
rushing towards the man had stepped into the gaping hole
with its forelegs. It had tried to balance itself; but its heavy
body became its own enemy. The elephant also had fallen
into the depths. Rogue elephant and roguish Azlvar-adiyan
had met their maker in the very same instant!
A shiver ran through Vandiya Devan’s body when he
realized these facts. His heart felt heavy with a sadness.
During this journey, he had forgotten all his suspicions

about that faithful Vaishnava devotee; in fact Vandiya
Devan felt a certain affection and respect towards him. "Is
this his fate?" Vandiya Devan wondered how he could finish
this hazardous journey without the help of Azlvar-adiyan;
how could he finish his mission successfully?
Vandiya Devan stepped closer to the edge which had
swallowed both man and beast and peered down. For a
while everything was covered by a dust-cloud and nothing
could be seen. Dust settled slowly and the path cleaved by
the falling elephant could be discerned because of the
trampled bushes and dislodged rocks.
"Why Thambi? What are you gawking at? Can’t you
lend a helping hand?" Vandiya Devan jumped back on
hearing this voice. In his astonishment, he almost fell into
the hole. Azlvar-adiyan was holding the root of a tree that
grew on a rocky outgrowth just a foot away from the path
cleared by the elephant and swinging.
Vandiya Devan was filled with delight and laughter.
"Oh, ho ho! Sir! You have given salvation to that King
Elephant but have stayed back in this heaven of Trisanku!"
(Trisanku’s heaven was a mythical, impromptu world
created between the worlds of the Gods and mortals.)
Vandiya Devan clapped his hands and beckoned the two
footmen.
They made a rope by binding their waist-cloths and
lowered it down the ravine. Both footmen held one end
while Vandiya Devan persuaded Mr. Nambi to let go of the
tree root and hold the other end. Then, all three of them
pulled with all their strength and with much effort lifted
stocky Mr. Azlvar-adiyan out of that deep canyon. Azlvaradiyan stretched out on the forest floor, heaving deep sighs
and gasping loud breaths. The other three men surrounded
him, comforting him and fanning him with their waistbands.

Very soon, Azlvar-adiyan sat up and said, "Come on!
Get ready! We must somehow reach the Royal Way before
nightfall. Where is my scarf? Where is my stick?"
"There is no hurry. Rest a little longer, we can leave
after you feel better," said Vandiya Devan. They heard the
howl of a jackal. Another jackal replied with equal melody
from the opposite direction. A hundred wolves and jackals
seemed to join the chorus. Sounds of movement from the
high ground of the forest towards the depths of the ravine
could now be heard. Vultures and eagles began flying
circles above the depths.
"An elephant’s death is not an ordinary incident.
Carnivorous beasts and birds from all the surrounding area
will gather to feast on its dead body. We might become
their side dishes! Hurry!" said Azlvar-adiyan. None opposed
him now.
The four men walked down that forest path as quickly
as they could. A little after dusk, they reached the Royal
Way. The highway was busy with people and vehicles
coming and going in both directions. Vandiya Devan was
impressed by men riding calmly on ponderous elephants. It
was a similar beast that had created such havoc in the
forest!
He asked, "Where is this highway coming from? Where
is it going? Where are we now? Which way are we to go?"
"We have come to the Royal Way that connects
Anuradhapura and Simhagiri. Dampallae is less than half a
league away. We can reach it by night," said Azlvar-adiyan.
"We could have come comfortably by this Royal Way!
Why did we take the forest path?"
"If we had taken the highway from the coast, we would
have been stopped and questioned in a hundred places. We
would have been completely stopped in Anuradhapura. I

have found out that the person we have come in search of
has gone towards Simhagiri. That is why I took this forest
path. Even now I am not sure if we can meet him. I hope he
has not gone away somewhere else!"
They walked along that Royal Way. Several houses,
black-smithies and even villages were found on both sides
of this road. People living in those wayside villages and
working in those shops appeared to be Singhalese. Tamil
soldiers went up and down the highway. People living in the
communities on both sides continued with their chores
without any fear.
"Who has control over these parts, now?" asked
Vandiya Devan.
Chozla armies have captured all areas up to
Dampallae. Beyond that, Simhagiri mountains and fortress
are under Mahinda."
"These civilians in these areas?"
"They are mostly Singhalese of Lanka. Since the
arrival of Ponniyin Selvan, the very nature of warfare has
changed in these parts. Battles are between Mahinda’s
soldiers and Chozla warriors; fought face to face when they
meet in a battlefield. Otherwise, the villagers live
peacefully. Buddhist monks are very happy because of this
arrangement. Our Prince had given orders to repair and
rebuild all the Buddhist Viharas (temples) in Anuradhapura.
Did you hear that! Why won’t those monks be happy? When
I meet the Prince, I’ll say, `I don’t like your actions one bit!’
-- that’s what I shall tell him."
"Tell him that without fail! Who is this Prince to do
things you dislike!? What divine privilege does he have?"
spoke Vandiya Devan with his usual sarcasm.
"Thambi, he has no divine privilege. But he has some
charming power. Whatever complaints they may raise

behind him, people are hypnotized when they stand before
him; not a single word do they utter. Only one person has
that power -- to stand and talk in front of the Prince -- to
influence him..."
"Yes, yes Sir! Who in this world is not aware of the
prowess of Mr. Azlvar-adiyan Nambi? Who is the Prince
compared to our brave warrior who opposed and overcame
the rogue elephant single-handed, equipped with a mere
wooden staff?"
"You have not understood me, My Friend! How can you
compare poor me with Ponniyin Selvan? I can face rogue
elephants with my wooden staff; I can meet tigers and
bears with bare hands. But my courage vanishes
somewhere when I stand in front of Ponniyin Selvan. My
voice dies; heart feels empathy and not a single word
comes out..." said Azlvar-adiyan.
"Whom did you mean when you talked about the
person who could influence him?"
"The whole world knows that; don’t you know? I am
talking about the Younger Pirati Kundavai. Her word is
gospel to him."
"Oh! You are talking about Princess Kundavai of
Pazlayarai; I thought you meant Young-Queen Nandini of
Pazluvoor."
"Nandini also has a unique power; but it is of a
different type."
"How? What difference?"
"Suppose a man is falling into the pits of hell and
perdition; Kundavai will stop him and turn him towards the
path of salvation and take him to paradise. That is one kind
of power. Do you know what Nandini would do? In a way
one could say that her power is even more exceptional. She
will declare that the pitfalls of perdition are paradise; she

will convince the man and make him jump happily into
those pits."
A shiver ran through Vandiya Devan. How well he has
estimated Nandini’s character and her frightening,
enchanting powers. This man has gauged her well. Perhaps
his claim that Nandini is his sister, could be true. Vandiya
Devan was lost in such thought and had no other questions.
They walked for a while in silent thought.
The sounds of galloping horses disturbed their silence.
Hoof-beats approached them from the opposite direction.
Within a few minutes, four horses came galloping swiftly.
Those flying horses raised a cloud of dust that swirled like
a mini tornado as they flashed past our foot travelers at
lightning speed. Even in that short time, Vandiya Devan
recognized one of the men seated on one of those horses.
Aha! That is Parthiban Pallava; confidential friend of
Prince Karikala in Kanchi. He does not care too much for
me. How and why did he come here to Lanka? Where is he
going or coming from?
After the horses had gone past the foot travelers, an
imposing voice ordered, "Stop!" The horses stopped noisily
and turned around. The man who appeared to be their
leader came back, guiding the horse capably. The others
followed him. The first horseman was none other than
Parthiban, whom we had met earlier at Kanchi. Vandiya
Devan’s guess was correct.
Parthiban studied Vandiya Devan and said, "What is
this Sir? How did you arrive here? They said that you
suddenly vanished from Tanjavur. I was sure that the
noblemen of Pazluvoor would have put an end to your
story."
"Can nobles of the Pazluvoor clan finish my story so
easily? I belong to the ancient Vaanar clan!"

"Yes; of course. There is none to compare with you
when it comes to saving your own life and somehow
escaping ..."
"Sir! I shall save my life when it is necessary to do so. I
will readily give up my life when it is needed. If I have to
die like that, I shall die by a fair duel with honorable scions
of the Pallava clan -- men like you. I won’t die at the hands
of mere Lords of Pazluvoor." Vandiya Devan’s hand was
already on the hilt of his sword.
"Chee! You want me to duel with you! In this distant
land! I’m not interested, Thambi. I am busy with an urgent
commission. What happened to the assignment given to you
by the Prince?" asked Parthiban.
"Completed. The letter meant for the Emperor was
delivered to the Emperor, personally. I delivered the letter
meant for the Younger Pirati also."
"Why did you come here?"
"I had a long time wish to see Lanka. I came here with
this Vaishnava as my guide."
"Oh! Have I not seen this man also, somewhere?"
"Yes, honored Sir! You have seen me before. I came to
Prince Karikala to enquire if he knew anything about my
sister. You were seated by his side at that time," said
Azlvar-adiyan.
"Who was that? Your sister?"

"She is now the Young-Queen of
Pazluvoor, Lady Nandini Devi."
"Really! If one considers all the
evils that have happened in the

kingdom because of that poisonous
snake, you must be hanged publicly
for being her brother."
"My Lord! I have taken a vow
that one day I shall die by hanging.
On that appointed day, I shall pray
that you come and fulfil my holy
vow with your own hands..."
"You lout! My hands alone will
not suffice to do that task; we need
a hundred men for that. Anyway,
forget it! Did you hear any news
about Prince Arulmozli on your
way? Has he come back to
Anuradhapura?"
"How will we know anything
about such matters, My Lord? We
came by the forest path. In the
jungle, a rogue elephant chased
me. You know how I ...."

"Enough of your story. Who
knows? I may fulfil your wish one
day and hang you personally."
Saying this, Parthiban turned his
horse around.
Azlvar-adiyan
had
been
surreptitiously examining the other
three horsemen as he was talking
to Parthiban Pallava. When all had
turned and galloped away, he asked
Vandiya Devan, "Thambi, did you
notice those other three men? Did
you recognize any of them?" a little
anxiously.
"No. I have never seen any of
them."
"Of course. You cannot have
seen them. I have seen two of
them; at midnight near the
memorial of Thiru-Puram-biyam.
They were swearing a horrible

oath." Azlvar-adiyan’s whole body
shivered.
"What was that horrible oath
they took?"
"They swore an oath to destroy
every rootstock of the Chozla
clan..."
"Oh dear!"
"How did they manage to enter
this island? Cunning fellows. How
did they manage to join company
with this rough Pallava Lord?"
Azlvar-adiyan became quiet after
posing these questions. Vandiya
Devan
remembered
something
from Kodi Karai. Two men had
departed for Lanka in a hurry a day
before his arrival; Poonkuzlali’s
brother had taken them in his boat.
Could those two men be part of

these three? What is the connection
between them and Parthiban?
All four were nearing Dampallae
the holy city of Buddhists. ***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 29 --The Elephant Driver
About two thousand years ago -- a thousand years
before the times of our story -- there was a Sinhala King
called Vallaham Bahu. In those days also, a Tamil army
invaded his island. King Vallaham Bahu escaped from his
capital and hid in the mountain caves near the town of
Dampallae. Later he regrouped his army and recaptured
Anuradhapura. He deepened the mountain caves that had
given him asylum and built them into a temple. To express
thanks to Lord Buddha, he placed several large and small
statues of the Enlightened One, (Buddha), in that cave
temple. Sculptors carved hundreds of images of Lord
Buddha; but in order to express all their artistic skills they
also created myriad statues and scenes of Hindu Gods and
mythology in those caves. These astonishing sculptures can
still be seen in the caves of modern Dampallae.
When Vandiya Devan entered that holy city, he felt that
he had stepped into a new world. Fresh flowers enchanted
him with their fragrance; street corners were filled with
carts and baskets full of lotus buds and champaka. The
devout bought those flowers and carried them in small
wicker baskets as they walked towards the temple. Groups
of men and women pilgrims filled the streets. Buddhist
monks clad in ocher mingled with them. Cries of the
devout, `Sadhu, sadhu; peace, peace!’ filled the town.
All this busy activity surprised Vandiya Devan. He
looked at Azlvar-adiyan and said, "I thought that we were
coming closer to the war-zone. This seems to be Lord
Buddha’s realm!"
"Yes Friend! This has been a famous Buddhist pilgrim
center for more than thousand years," replied Azlvaradiyan.

"Didn’t you say that it is now under control of Chozla
armies?"
"Yes; I confirm it once again."
"I don’t see any Chozla soldiers!"
"They are outside the town in army camps. That is by
orders of the Prince."
"Which Prince?"
"Why? The same Prince we have been looking for!
Prince Arulmozli."
"I meant to ask you about that, Mr. Nambi. Parthiban
looked for the Prince in this town and was going back
saying he isn’t here. What is the point in us coming here
and looking for him in this town?"
"Will I believe him if that Pallava nobleman declares,
`He isn’t here’? I will search personally and confirm the
truth. Hiranya declared that there is no God called `Hari;’
but did Prahlada believe him?"
"Sir! Mr. Nambi of the devout Vaishnava faith! You
were constantly picking quarrels with followers of other
faiths in our country. Look at all these Buddhist monks -how come you are so quiet? Why? Are you fearful of the
large numbers of the `enemy’ force?"
"Thambi, what is fear? What will it look like?"
"Black, huge and demonic; large as an elephant. Have
you never seen it?"
"No." After saying this, Azlvar-adiyan crossed the
street to talk to two men who were standing there. They
appeared to be Tamils. Azlvar-adiyan talked with them for a
while before he came back.
"Mr. Nambi, what did you ask them? Did you ask if
Vishnu was greater than Shiva? If you ask anyone in this

town, they are likely to reply that Buddha is the greatest!
See how huge these statues are?" said Vandiya Devan.
"Thambi didn’t you know that I have packed up all my
Vaishnava fanaticism and left them in Rameswaram? I have
come here on official business."
"What did you say to those men? Did you ask them
about Prince Arulmozli?"
"No; I asked them what was the occasion in this town
today."
"What did they say?"
"They said that two important pilgrims from China are
visiting this town; tonight, there is a special festival in the
Buddha Vihara (temple) in their honor. That is why the
town is filled with this festive crowd."
"Where are those Chinese pilgrims coming from?"
"They had come here yesterday and gone to Simhagiri.
They are returning from Simhagiri and will soon enter this
town, said those men."
"Where is Simhagiri?"
"About a league from here and still under the control
of the Lankans. We can see it from here by daylight. There
is a very strong fortress on top of the Simhagiri hillock; in a
cave inside that fort are some astonishing ancient paintings
with everlasting colors. The Chinese pilgrims must have
gone there to view those paintings. They must have found it
very difficult to climb up and down that steep rockface."
After a while Azlvar-adiyan pointed, "Look over there!"
A beautifully decorated elephant was coming down the
street. Two men were seated in the howdah on top of that
elephant. Their features and clothes proclaimed them to be
the Chinese pilgrims. An elephant driver was seated on the
elephant’s neck with an Ankush (goad) in his hand. A crowd

of people came, surrounding the elephant and raising
cheering cries.
"Did you see?" asked Azlvar-adiyan.
"Yes; I see. Dear Lord! What a huge elephant, shall we
see if there is any ravine close by?"
"No need. Let us just stand by this roadside and
watch."
They waited by the street as the elephant procession
came closer. The elephant went past, followed by the
cheering crowd. Vandiya Devan’s eyes concentrated on the
pilgrims seated on the elephant. He wondered about the
devotion of those men who had crossed many seas and
many lands to come from their distant homeland on this
pilgrimage to the holy cities sacred to Lord Buddha.
Perhaps it is justified that they are shown such courtesies
in this land. How fantastic that their journey is not harmed
in any way even in these times of war! Perhaps Prince
Arulmozli arranged for their safety! He is the only one who
could have thought of it. But where is he? Will it be easy to
find him in this unfamiliar land? Will my journey this far
with this Vaishnava fanatic be wasted?
"Thambi, did you see?" asked Azlvar-adiyan.
"I did."
"What did you see?"
"I found that the Chinese are flat faced; their clothes
are peculiar."
"I am not asking about those pilgrims."
"Then?"
"Did you notice the elephant driver?"
"The elephant driver! I did not notice him."

"Incredible! When that elephant driver glanced at us
casually, did you not see his eyes light up?"
"What is that? Were any lamps lit in that elephant
driver’s eyes to make them shine?"
"What a useless fellow you are! I am not sure if I
should be surprised at your carelessness or be astonished
by the intellect of that Younger Pirati who saddled you with
such a responsible mission! Forget it and come with me
now."
They followed the elephant and the procession behind
it. The elephant stopped in front of the Buddha Vihara. The
elephant driver whispered something in the elephant’s ear
and it knelt down with folded forelegs. The pilgrims
descended. Buddhist monks stood on the steps and
welcomed them with flowers and cheers. Conches were
blown; bells sounded; drums reverberated. Chants of
`Strive for the grace of Lord Buddha’ `Strive for the
prevalence of Law’ `Strive for the triumph of Order’ filled
the air. The two pilgrims and the crowd following them,
entered the temple caves.
The elephant driver, who had dismounted earlier, led
the elephant away. He noticed four men standing towards
one side and handed the beast to one of them. He spoke to
another man, pointing at Azlvar-adiyan with his finger.
Followed by the other two men, he quickly walked down the
street and disappeared around the corner. The man to
whom the elephant driver had pointed out Azlvar-adiyan
crossed the street and approached our friends. He asked
softly, "Sir, are you willing to come with me?"
"I’ve been waiting to do so" said Azlvar-adiyan.
"Can you show me some identification?"
Azlvar-adiyan showed him a Kodumbalur signet ring
given by Commander Bhoothi Vikrama. "Fine. Follow me"

said the man as he walked down the street. They followed
him till they crossed the town and entered a forest trail.
They followed the trail for some distance and reached a
wayside pavilion in a clearing by the path. The man said
that they may have to wait for some time. He then climbed
a tree and kept watch.
"What is all this mystery about? I do not understand,"
said Vandiya Devan.
"Everything will be clear very soon; be patient,"
advised Azlvar-adiyan.
Two saddled horses were tied to a post near that
pavilion. Vandiya Devan was anxious about there being only
two horses. What was the mystery about the elephant
driver? Vandiya Devan had glanced at his face for just a
second before concentrating on the Chinese pilgrims. He
tried to recall the face of that elephant driver but could not
remember it.
"Mr. Nambi, who was the elephant driver? Can’t you
tell me?" asked Vandiya Devan.
"Who could it be? Can’t you guess?"
"Was he Ponniyin Selvan?"
"I guess so, because of the twinkle in his eyes."
"Wouldn’t others have recognized him, just like you?"
"No. Who would expect the Chozla Prince to go about
as an elephant driver for pilgrims from China? Moreover,
people in these parts are not familiar with his face."
"You said that the pilgrims were returning from
Simhagiri"
"Yes."
"Isn’t Simhagiri still under enemy control?"
"Yes."

"So, is the Prince returning after venturing amidst
enemies?"
"Why stop at Simhagiri? The Prince had journeyed
with these pilgrims up to Mahi-yangana and Samantakoota, into the heartland of enemy territory."
"Why did he subject himself to such grave danger?"
"He must have been eager to see those towns and the
wealth of sculpture and art in those places."
"What an eagerness! What a Prince! How did that
astrologer in Kudanthai claim that this reckless Prince
would one day become Emperor of the world?"
"Thambi, is that what the Astrologer of Kudanthai
said?"
"Do you also believe in him?"
"I have no faith in astrology and never bother with
predictions. I know without any support from astrology ..."
Hoof-beats of galloping horses could be heard. The
sound was approaching the clearing. The footman who was
watching, climbed down quickly and unhitched the two
horses. He mounted one, asked Azlvar-adiyan to get on the
other horse and said, "In a few minutes, some horses will
gallop past this trail. We should follow them."
"What about a mount for me?" asked Vandiya Devan.
"I have orders only to bring him."
"Whose orders?"
"I cannot reveal that."
"I must see the Prince immediately; I have important
letters and messages for him."
"I know nothing about that Sir."
Azlvar-adiyan had climbed upon the other horse as he
said, "Be patient Thambi. I shall tell the Prince about you

and send for you."
"Mr. Nambi, are you not aware of the importance and
urgency of the message I am carrying?"
"Give that letter to me; I can deliver it."
"That is impossible!"
"Then be patient; I cannot do anything else."
"Isn’t there anything else?"
"Nothing else."

Vandiya Devan boiled with
anger. It was clear that the men
were about to lead Azlvar-adiyan to
the Prince. Lord Kodumbalur had
asked him to keep an eye on
Azlvar-adiyan when he delivered
his message and letter. It cannot be
possible with this arrangement.
Some horses came closer and
galloped past them; they flashed by
with the speed of lightning. When
both men on the horses by the
pavilion took up the reins of their
steeds, preparing to follow, an
unexpected
incident
occurred.

Vandiya Devan caught hold of the
leg of the man on the horse and
shoved it forward with one push.
Even before the man fell to the
ground with a `thud’ Vandiya
Devan had leaped upon that horse
and gathered its reins, galloping
forward. Azlvar-adiyan followed.
The man who had fallen set up a
hue and cry as he drew his sword
and threw it at Vandiya Devan. But
Vandiya Devan bent his body low,
below the horse’s belly; the sword
flew past him and struck a tree.
Two horses galloped as swift as
the wind, following the three
horses which had gone ahead. They
neither went too close nor pulled
back
too
far.
Azlvar-adiyan
encouraged, "Good work, Thambi!"
But Vandiya Devan did not reply.

He
was
worried
about
the
consequences of his action. He was
even beginning to question himself
about why he should get entangled
in such complications for the sake
of some woman, however special
she was. The horses sprinted down
that forest trail with the speed of
wind and with the speed of
thought.
****
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 30 --Fist Fight
Vandiya Devan felt that the horses were going along
an endless path. He wondered if Azlvar-adiyan had
betrayed him to the enemies. Forest encroached on both
sides, filled with heavy darkness. Who knows what danger
lurks in this darkness? Panthers, bears, elephants and
poisonous snakes, perhaps even enemy soldiers -- who
knows? They said that Dampallae was the last outpost
occupied by Chozla men; but where are we going?
Fortunately, moonlight showed the way. Moonbeams
played hide and seek with the shadows of tall trees around
them. The dancing light fell on the trail to reveal shadowy
silhouettes of three horses racing ahead. Their galloping
hoof-beats never stopped. Suddenly, other sounds
encroached. The babble of many human voices; cheerful
sounds of dancing and singing. Ah! Light in the midst of a
clearing. Torch light showed huge, open-stoves bright with
furnace-like fires. Who are these soldiers camping merrily
in the middle of this forest? Chozlas? Enemies?
Vandiya Devan had very little time to think about this;
he did not notice one of the horses in front stop suddenly
and turn around. The horse which turned back came close
to Vandiya Devan’s horse. The horseman bent sideways and
suddenly slugged Vandiya Devan. While Vandiya Devan was
unsettled and rattled by the force of that strike, the
horseman took hold of his ankle and shoved it over the
saddle. Vandiya Devan fell to the ground noisily. His horse
trotted ahead a few yards and stopped. By now, the soldier
who had unseated him dismounted and came closer.
Vandiya Devan was completely disoriented as he tried to
get up unsteadily when the man quickly plucked the knife
and sword from his waistband and threw it away. This act
revived and enraged Vandiya Devan; he jumped up quickly.
Making a tight fist with both hands, he landed a heavy

punch on the man who had unseated him. That man did not
accept the beating quietly. He showed his strength by
striking back. A fantastic fist fight between them was the
result. They fought like the demons Gatotkacha and
Idumban. They wrestled like Arjuna and Shiva disguised as
the hunter. They threw themselves at each other like two
huge elephants engaged in battle.
Azlvar-adiyan and the other two men had stopped as
they watched with surprise. They were looking at this
amazing fist fight in the dancing moonlight beneath those
quivering trees. Very soon footsteps approached the spot.
Some soldiers parted the branches and came closer with
lighted torches. They too stood close by, watching the
remarkable bout. Soon, a sizeable crowd had formed a
circle around the wrestling men.
Finally, Vandiya Devan was thrown down. The victor
sat on Vandiya Devan’s chest and pinned him down as he
loosened his waist-pouch and extracted the roll of sealed
letters. Vandiya Devan made an immense effort to stop him
but could not succeed. After taking the letter, that man
jumped aside towards the torch light. Two soldiers who had
noticed his signal had already taken hold of Vandiya Devan,
pinning him down to the ground.
With measureless rage and exasperation, Vandiya
Devan shouted, "Wretched Nambi! Is this how you betray a
friend? Get that letter from him!"
"Dear Man! I am not capable of doing that!" replied
Azlvar-adiyan Thirumalai Nambi.
"Chee! I’ve never met a coward like you! How foolish
of me to trust you as my companion in this journey!"
Azlvar-adiyan dismounted slowly from his horse and
walked up to Vandiya Devan; he whispered, "You fool, the
letter has reached the person it was addressed to. Why are
you babbling uselessly?"

The others had noticed the face of the man who was
reading the letter under the torch light. A cheering cry rose
from them. "Long life to Ponniyin Selvan" "Victory to the
vanquisher of enemy kings" "Long life to our Prince" "Long
life to our Chozla Prince." Their cheers filled the forest.
Birds nesting on those trees woke noisily and echoed their
ecstasy with wingbeats and shrill calls. More men came
running to find out the cause for all the commotion.

When the victorious soldier
noticed the growing crowd, he
looked around and said, "Go back
to the camp, all of you. Make
arrangements for a feast. I’ll come
and join you soon." Upon this, the
noisy crowd fell silent as a single
man and turned back into the
clearing.
Vandiya Devan who had been
badly beaten was watching all this
as he sat on the ground. He was
drowning in a sea of astonishment
that soothed all his pains. This is
Prince Arulmozli Varma! What
strength in his fists! How quick he

is! No wonder they say that even if
you are beaten, be beaten by a
champion. He has the charisma and
dignity of Arjuna of the epics;
strength of a Bhima of the legends.
I am not surprised that the whole
world is full of praise for him!
Prince Arulmozli came near
Vandiya Devan. For a second he
wondered if the Prince was going
to display the strength of his fist
once again. But he was reassured
by the smile on the bright face of
the Prince.
"Welcome Friend! Welcome to
beautiful Eezlam! You have come
so far across seas, to join us brave
Tamil soldiers in this island. Are
you happy about the chivalrous
welcome we have given you? Would
you like some more fanfare?" said

the Prince with a smile. (Note:
Eezlam is the Tamil name for
Lanka.)
Vandiya Devan jumped up with a
reverent bow, saying, "My Lord, the
letter sent by your gracious sister
has reached you safely and my duty
is done. Now, I do not have any
need to safeguard my life. If you
wish, let us read the chapter on
war for some more time."
"Very well, you can say that
easily! You need not bother about
safeguarding your life anymore; but
that worry is mine now. Or else,
how can I answer my dear sister
tomorrow? Dear Sir! This letter
that I read just now appears to be
written in my sister’s own hand.
Did she give it to you personally?"

"Yes, My Prince. I had the
fortune to receive this letter
personally from the hands of the
gracious Princess. After that I have
journeyed day and night, without
stopping anywhere to bring it to
you."
"That is obvious, otherwise you
could not have come here so
quickly. How can I thank you for
this unique service you have
rendered?" saying this, the Prince
heartily embraced Vandiya Devan
Vallavarayan of the Vaanar clan.
The gallant youth felt that he had
reached paradise; all his pains
vanished magically.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 31 --Eleyla Singan Play
It was a circular clearing in the middle of the forest
where trees encircled a dry pool. About thousand Chozla
men had pitched camp in that clearing. Gigantic stew pots
filled with rice and beans were bubbling on huge stonestoves with fiery log-fires. Meat was being cooked in large
cauldrons. Cooking smells filled the air and aroused their
appetites. The men engaged themselves with song and
dance till the food was cooked. Their darling Prince had
arrived to join them, here, at this time and their happiness
knew no bounds. The Captain of this company of frontier
guards had a difficult time in curbing their enthusiasm and
inducing some semblance of order among the men. Finally,
he persuaded them to form a semi-circle and sit in the
middle of that clearing.
They had chopped a huge forest tree leaving a seatlike stump of the trunk. Prince Arulmozli came to sit upon
this tree-stump throne. He was no longer dressed in the
clothes of an elephant driver. Silken cloth graced his waist.
A golden diadem on his curls, pearl necklets, jeweled
bracelets and shoulder ornaments proclaimed his royalty.
The Captain, Vandiya Devan and Azlvar-adiyan sat near him
on tree logs. The Eleyla Singan Play organized for his
entertainment was about to begin.
About a thousand years ago, Tamil soldiers had
captured a large part of Lanka, just like the present days.
Eleyla Singan was the leader of the Tamils in those days.
Lanka’s King, defeated by the Tamils, had gone into hiding
in the mountain country. The Lankan King had a son named
Dhutta Gamanu who was a very capable warrior. The brave
Prince dreamed of the day when he could recapture Lanka
after defeating Eleyla Singan. One day, when this
Singhalese Prince was a young lad, he was sleeping on his
bed curled up, cramped into a ball with folded arms and

legs. His mother asked, "My Child, why are you curled up
like this? Why don’t you stretch your legs and hands as you
sleep?" Dhutta Gamanu replied, "Mother, the Tamil soldiers
are crowding me on one side; the sea forms a barrier on the
other side. What can I do? That is why I am curled up like
this." When this lad attained manhood, he collected an
army and led his men against Eleyla Singan. His small army
was defeated and scattered in no time by the well-trained
Tamils. Dhutta Gamanu resorted to a cunning plan. He
walked into the camp of Eleyla Singan and said, "King! My
small legion has been defeated by your huge army. I am the
only one left now. You are born in a race of brave men;
therefore, I challenge you to come and duel with me;
wrestle with me man to man. Whoever wins has full claim
on this Lanka; the other can reach the abodes meant for
those who meet a brave death."
Eleyla Singan was very impressed by this courage and
bravery in young Dhutta Gamanu. He agreed to the
wrestling match, ordering that none of his men should
intervene or come to either one’s aid. The match began;
Dhutta Gamanu’s men who had scattered came back to
watch. They wrestled for a long time: Dhutta Gamanu
fought with a passion to regain his homeland while Eleyla
Singan was weakened because of compassion for the brave
youth; he did not use all his skills in that fight. In the end,
Eleyla Singan died. Dhutta Gamanu crowned himself. Later,
he raised a memorial for brave Eleyla Singan in the spot
where he fell, in praise of his compassion and bravery.
Chozla soldiers presented this unique historical
incident in the form of a dance-drama. Dance and song
were exceptional. The soldier who acted as Eleyla Singan
was so good that the men wondered if he had really fallen
dead, when he acted the last scene. The Prince and all
others who watched the play cheered loudly with shouts of
praise.

While the play was in progress, the Prince turned to
Azlvar-adiyan and said, "Thirumalai, the wrestling match
between Dhutta Gamanu and Eleyla Singan is depicted in a
beautiful fresco of everlasting colors inside the caves of
Dampallae. Did you both see those paintings?"
"No, My Lord. I recognized you when we entered the
main streets of Dampallae. We had no time to visit the cave
temples," replied Azlvar-adiyan.
"One should see those frescoes inside the cave temple
without fail. Thirumalai, there are all kinds of beautiful
sculptures and paintings in our homeland. But more
astonishing arts are evident in this tiny island," said the
Prince.
"My Lord the paintings and sculptures in this country
will not vanish anywhere. We can view them anytime later.
But meeting you is not that easy. We were lucky in finding
you, because we came into town at the correct time. Lord
Parthiban who came here before us, returned saying `He is
not here.’ We met him by the highway."
"Yes; the Captain said that my brother’s dear friend
came looking for me. Could you guess why he came here?"
"I can speak with certainty. Prince Karikala has sent
him here to escort you back to Kanchi City."
"How remarkable! You seem to know the reason!
Perhaps you also know what was written in the letter
brought here so safely by this friend of yours?"
"Your beloved sister has written that you should come
back immediately to Pazlayarai. My Lord, when Princess
Kundavai wrote that letter and handed it to this brave
Vaanar youth in privacy, I was watching them secretly while
hidden behind the shutters of that garden gazebo."
Vandiya Devan who was seated behind Azlvar-adiyan
pinched that Vaishnava Nambi on his back. Azlvar-adiyan

smacked his back and said, "This is a wicked forest; full of
bugs that bite at night."
The Prince was speaking with some anger, "Chee! Are
you up to your tricks even with my sister? What is this?"
"Only because I watched them, I was convinced to
bring him here, safely, to you. Only Lord Buddha knows the
trouble I had in leading him safely without letting him
become embroiled in any scrapes on the way. I am sure that
he would never have reached you if we had taken the road
through Anuradhapura. He would have dueled with
someone on the way and given up his life! That is why I led
him through the forest trail; even there he tried to fight a
rogue elephant. I killed that wild beast with my wooden
staff and brought him here safely."
"Oh! Does it mean that you came to Lanka merely to
guide him safely till he reached me?"
"No, My Lord. For my part, I have also brought you an
urgent message."
"What message? Tell me quickly."
"Prime Minister Anirudda sends word that he feels it is
appropriate for you to remain in Lanka for some more
time."
"All three elders send three different messages like
this? What am I to do?" asked Prince Arulmozli Varma.
At this point, Vandiya Devan spoke up, "My Prince,
please forgive me for interrupting. You must listen to the
directive of your sister."
"Why do you say that, Sir?"
"Because, your heart tells you to heed the orders of
your sister. Even if you do not care to follow her wishes, I
am bound to follow her orders; she asked me to escort you
back to Pazlayarai."

"I have been wishing for a brave
young companion like you for quite
some time!" said the Prince with a
delighted smile. ***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 32 --Killi Valava’s Elephant
The cooking was done by the time the play ended.
They brought bundles of large lotus leaves and placed one
leaf each in front of the soldiers seated in neat rows;
stewed rice and gram with a steaming soup of meat and
vegetables was served. When the men had begun to eat,
the Prince wandered amidst them, enquiring about their
welfare... He stopped to ask about this man’s health and
another man’s family. He inquired about their hometowns
and names. Men who had been addressed in this fashion
were drowned in a sea of joy. Friends by their side
congratulated them on their good fortune.
Chozla men held their young Prince in much esteem.
This esteem and adoration had grown tenfold in recent
times. They knew about their Prince’s concerned efforts to
arrange for food and supplies from their homeland.
Moreover, the Prince mingled freely with common soldiers,
interested in their welfare, encouraging their activities.
This characteristic increased his popularity and endeared
him to his men, who tried to make him tarry longer near
them. They gathered courage to ask him some question or
other. Many wanted to know "When are we planning to
attack Pulastiya City?" The Prince replied to this query in
various ways, "What is the point in attacking Pulastiya?
Mahinda is in Rohana?" To others he said, "Be patient; let
the rainy season pass." Some soldiers expressed their
disquiet about being lazy without fighting any war. Others
said, "My Lord, you must come and visit us like this at least
once in a month. We shall then try to be patient."
After such socializing, the Prince walked to a tent
pitched for his exclusive use, a little away from the
clearing. He asked Vandiya Devan and Azlvar-adiyan to
accompany him.

"Did you notice the enthusiasm of these men? If only
Tanjavur had cooperated, this whole island would be under
our control by now! A good opportunity has been wasted.
We can conduct no war during the rainy season in these
parts; our men have to remain idle for the next three or
four months."
On hearing this, Thirumalai Nambi Azlvar-adiyan said,
"My Lord! I am surprised at your being concerned about
this. There, in the mainland, grave danger threatens the
very foundations of the Chozla Empire! The great Kingdom
established by Vijayala, the Empire built by Paranthaka and
Sundara Chozla is about to be torn asunder by internal
strife."
"Yes, yes. Of Course! You have both come with
important information. I am foolishly babbling about my
minor worries. Well, now tell me all that you have come to
tell me. Let him begin first." Prince Arulmozli pointed
towards Vandiya Devan.
Vallavarayan Vandiya Devan began his story. He spoke
about everything that he had seen and heard since leaving
Kanchi City. He pretended a dislike of speaking about his
bravery, his cunning, his cleverness, and his daring deeds;
but nevertheless, spoke about them expansively. Finally,
"Sir, they treat your dear father as if he were a prisoner.
Close relatives, high officials and noble clansmen have
come together in treacherous conspiracy. Your sister, the
Younger Pirati is tortured by much worry because of all
this. Therefore, you should leave immediately and come
with me to Pazlayarai. Do not tarry even a single moment!"
he finished his tale.
Then, Azlvar-adiyan spoke of his experiences. He
confirmed everything that Vandiya Devan had mentioned;
and in addition, spoke about the conspiracy of the assassins
who met at midnight near the ruined war memorial of

Thiru-Puram-biyam. Once again, he reiterated the Prime
Minister’s message that the young Prince should not go
home since the situation was dangerous and confusing.
"The Prime Minister asks that you should not only avoid
going back but that you should refrain from expanding the
campaign here in Lanka. He requests that you collect all
the army divisions and station them in North Lanka. The
Prime Minister feels that the conspirators will soon be out
in the open revealing their identities and intentions; at that
time, this army in Lanka would be very useful. The Prime
Minister also said that I should inform you of this: the
Vanniyar Battalion, the Kaikola Battalions and the Vellala
Battalions stationed in the Pandiya country at present, are
ready to give up their life and soul in your cause."
"Thirumalai, what is your mentor thinking about? Does
he consider himself as another master of intrigue like
Chanakya of Pataliputra -- a Chanakya of Anbil? Does he
suggest that I should feud with my kith and kin?" asked the
Prince with some agitation.
"No, My Lord! Prime Minister Anirudda will never
suggest that. But he feels that those who conspire treason
against their chosen monarch, those who contemplate
treason against the empire -- such persons should be
punished appropriately at the right time. Is it not your duty
to help that goal?"
"How can I be responsible? If treason and conspiracy
is truly being contemplated, it is the Emperor who has to
take appropriate action. How can I venture into this matter
without my father’s orders?"
Vandiya Devan intervened into their discussion, "My
Lord Prince, your father is not free at present. Pazluvoor
nobles guard him like a prisoner, allowing none to approach
him freely, under strict guard in the palace. Your brother
has vowed to not enter Tanjavur City! Is it not your

responsibility to safeguard the Empire in such
circumstances? It is your duty to return to Pazlayarai
immediately!"
"Why should the Prince go to Pazlayarai? I cannot
understand that!" said Thirumalai Nambi.
The Prince was lost in thought for a while. "Lust for
land is vile. Because of a lust for lands and empires, what
heinous sins are being committed on this beautiful earth!
Do you know the history of Simhagiri Fort -- which I visited
today?"
"I have not heard about it, Sir," said Vandiya Devan.
"Ah! Let me enlighten you! About five hundred years
ago Dadhu-sena ruled this island. He had two sons -Kashyapa and Magalla. Dadhu-sena’s commander and
Kashyapa conspired together. Kashyapa imprisoned his own
father and ascended the throne. Magalla ran away across
the sea to Tamil Country. Soon they raised a high wall
around Dadhu-sena’s prison, entombed him and killed him.
Kashyapa who was instrumental of that hideous crime was
gripped by a fright that his brother Magalla would come
back seeking revenge. Kashyapa came to this Simhagiri
and built a fortress on its peak. He lived in the fort,
confident that no enemy could capture the stronghold on
that pinnacle. He lived in such hiding for eighteen years!
Finally, one day, Magalla came back supported by an army
of Pandiya men and laid siege against Simhagiri. After all
these years, Kashyapa lost his senses. He, who had been
hiding in the fort for all these years, emerged with foolish
confidence, fought a war, and died. In that fort built by that
hideous monster, the sinner who killed his own father, there
are some beautiful frescos. I saw them today when I went
with the Chinese pilgrims. The beauty of those paintings is
beyond compare. They were painted several hundred years

ago, but even today no colors have faded... they remain
fresh ... beautiful ..."
"Sir, can I interrupt with a question?" asked Azlvaradiyan.
"Why this hesitation? Ask freely!"
"Isn’t Simhagiri still under the control of enemy
forces?"
"Yes; I have no intention of starting anything to
capture that fort now. It would mean a foolish waste of
lives."
"I did not mean that! I am concerned if it was prudent
to enter an enemy stronghold at this time. Why did it
become expedient that you should go there as the elephant
driver of Chinese pilgrims? When I saw you on that
elephant’s neck, I wasn’t sure if I should believe my own
eyes! Your signal, the raised eyebrow, cleared my doubt
and made me sure. Why do you venture into such dangers?"
"Thirumalai, do you think that my life is so precious?
How many brave Tamil men have come to this island and
given up their life?"
"They lost their life in war; you sought unnecessary
danger!"
"Not unnecessary; there were two reasons. I have had
a long time wish to see the frescos of Simhagiri. My wish
was fulfilled today ..."
"The other reason ...?"
"The news reached me as soon as Pallava Parthiban
landed at Tricone Hill. I did not wish to meet him today,
because..."
"Because ...?"
"I had met the Prime Minister who had come to
Mattotam. I expected some message from him. If two

elders send word, I will have to obey the orders received
first."
Now Vandiya Devan was transported with joy, "Say
that My Lord, say that! Now, my suit has won!"
"Prince, this fellow tricked you ..." said Azlvar-adiyan.
"He did not trick me. I tricked myself. I saw him push
that horseman who was sent to bring you to me. I noticed
him riding that horse and following me. I meant to teach
him a lesson..."
"And it was a good lesson too! Each lesson was a
measure full. Even now my body aches! Is this any way to
treat a messenger who brought letters? It is no matter, if
only you come back with me to Pazlayarai...."
"Thirumalai, this reminds me of an old childhood
poem. There was an ancestor of mine named Perum-killi
Valava. He had an incredible elephant in his possession.
One of its feet would be in Kanchi and another would be
placed on Tanjavur. The third leg would be on this Eezlam,
while the fourth would be placed firmly upon Uraiyoor.
One leg in Kacchi
One leg on fertile and fabulous Tanchai,
and of the remaining two,
One on Eezlam and another on Kozli
Thus, stood that creature,
the elephant of Killi Valava!

(Note: Tanchai is Tanjavur; Kozli oor is another old
name for Uraiyoor, a former capital of the Chozla’s.)
What fabulous imagination that poet had! I have seen
several herds of thousands of elephants on this island. But
how useless? If only I had one single elephant like that
imaginary beast of the poet’s, I too can be at all places -Madurai, Kanchi, Pazlayarai and Lanka -- at the same time."
On hearing about the poet’s elephant, both Vandiya
Devan and Azlvar-adiyan fell into uncontrollable laughter.

Thirumalai asked, "You don’t have such a fantastic
elephant! What will you do?"
"Why this doubt? Have we not agreed that he is
coming to Pazlayarai?"
"Be patient, both of you, for a while. Let’s go to
Anuradhapura tomorrow. Anyway, I ought to meet
Parthiban over there. I shall decide after hearing what he
has to say."
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 33 --Message Of The Monolith
Prince Arulmozli Varma, Azlvar-adiyan and Vandiya
Devan Vallavarayan left for Anuradhapura even before
sunrise on the next day. After a short forest path, they were
soon on the Royal Way. Vandiya Devan was surprised that
the Prince had not brought any other footmen or soldiers
for his guard.
Vandiya Devan had never felt such joy as he felt on the
journey that day. It was an exhilarating experience just
riding on that Royal Way, in the early morning light with
thick forest trees encroaching on both sides. He was also
brimming with pride on accomplishing the task assigned by
the young Princess of Pazlayarai. Moreover, his lifelong
wish was fulfilled. He had met the darling son of the
bounteous Chozla Country. He had met the brave, young
Prince whose charm and characteristics were being
celebrated all over the land. And what a remarkable,
marvelous meeting it was? The anecdotes he had heard
about Arulmozli Varma being an unconventional Prince
were indeed true.
He had completely unnerved me by suddenly turning
the horse around and attacking me! Perhaps this swiftness
is the secret of the success in the campaigns he leads. It
must be his strategy to attack the enemy at unexpected
moments in unexpected ways. Is that the only reason for
his success? How comfortable and easy going he is with his
men -- they are completely enslaved by affection! He has
attracted the affection and love of the people he has
conquered. Who can say that these lands were recently
subject to battles... Look at these people walking by freely
on these roads...? The country folk in these villages on both
sides are going about their daily chores without fear or
worry. Their faces bear no signs of sorrow or anger. I can
even hear the tinkling laughter of women and children.

How fantastic! What an incredible man! Vandiya Devan
recalled the incident -- Pazluvoor nobles complaining to the
Emperor because they were unwilling to supply foodstuffs
for the armies in Lanka; because they were enraged that
Prince Arulmozli should insist on supplies from the
homeland instead of commandeering food supplies from the
people of the conquered lands.
He compared Prince Karikala’s gruesome style of
warfare and this compassionate, law-abiding campaign of
Prince Arulmozli. He felt ashamed to find fault with Prince
Karikala who was his chosen liege lord and master till very
recently. Still, he could not refrain from comparing the
styles of both Princes whenever he saw the happy faces of
people on the road. It would be impossible to find such
sights in the lands ravished by Prince Karikala’s war
campaigns. Sounds of wailing and destruction would fill
every direction!
Vandiya Devan was filled with an eagerness to ask of
many things, and to talk about various subjects with this
unusual Prince. But how could he start any conversation
while riding swiftly on these horses? Even so, he found one
opportunity to talk with Arulmozli.
When they had almost reached the outskirts of
Anuradhapura, Vandiya Devan noticed a huge sculpture of
Lord Buddha on the wayside. Since he had seen several
such monolithic sculptures everywhere in Lanka, he did not
pay any particular attention to it. But he had to pull in the
reins and stop his horse because Arulmozli had suddenly
stopped near that statue. Azlvar-adiyan who had gone
ahead, also turned back. Arulmozli quietly examined that
splendid statue for some time.
"Well! What an exquisite piece of sculpture!" said the
Prince.

"I don’t see anything particularly exceptional. They
have such huge statues everywhere in this country ... I
don’t know why!" said Vandiya Devan.
Prince Arulmozli smiled, "You speak your mind without
hesitation; I am happy about that!"
Azlvar-adiyan Thirumalai Nambi declared, "Sir, it is
only today that Lord Vallavarayan has espoused to speak
the truth."
"Mr. Nambi, it’s all a result of the company I keep.
Since I met you at Veera-Narayana-Puram, creativity and
imagination danced on my tongue. After meeting this
Prince, I have begun speaking the truth."
Prince
Arulmozli
ignored
their
chatter
and
concentrated on the sculpture. "In the whole world there
are only two perfect forms of sculpture. One is the figure of
Nataraja, Dancing Shiva and the other is Buddha."
"I have never seen any huge sculptures of Nataraja
like these monolith Buddhas."
"The ancient monarchs of Lanka were great men. The
land they ruled is small; but their vision was big; their
devotion was huge. They expressed their devotion by
erecting such huge statues of Buddha. In their devotion to
the Buddhist faith, they built huge stupas (spires, cupolas).
I am ashamed to think of the tiny and minuscule Shiva
temples and sculpture panels in our country after seeing
these lavish viharas (Buddhist temples) huge monolithic
statues and towers," said Arulmozli.
He dismounted and walked up to the pedestal of the
statue. He examined the carved lotus, bearing Lord
Buddha’s lotus feet and the fresh lotus buds decorating
those feet. A carved water-flask, perhaps filled with
sacrament water, was on the pedestal. He touched those
feet reverently with both his hands and came back to

mount his steed. They walked the horses slowly. Vandiya
Devan mumbled to Azlvar-adiyan, "What is this? Is the
Prince thinking of becoming a convert to Buddhism?"
Ponniyin Selvan smiled at them, "My devotion to Lord
Buddha is not without reason. Those lotus feet of Lord
Buddha gave me an important message."
"Oh! I did not hear anything!"
"It was a silent message from the monolith."
"What message? Can we know it?"
"The lotus feet of the Lord announced to me that I
should come to the Lion Falls Lake in Anuradhapura at
midnight tonight," said Prince Arulmozli.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 34 --Anuradhapura
They had neared the City of Anuradhapura a little
before sunset. Vandiya Devan became speechless, lost in a
sea of astonishment even as he saw that ancient capital of
Lanka from some distance. He had heard several men
speak of Anuradhapura; from their descriptions he had
formed a certain mental picture of the city. But that great
city was beyond all imagination!
What humongous ramparts that snake around in all
directions! One could not even see where the wall turns
direction! How many hundreds of towers and cupolas raise
their crowns with dignity beyond those walls! Every spire
and tower, is placed at quite a distance from the other; can
so many buildings and mansions be enclosed within one
fort? Kanchi, Pazlayarai and Tanjavur are nothing
compared to this great metropolis! Perhaps Ashoka’s
Pataliputra or Vikrama’s Ujjain or even Karikala’s Kaaviripattinam may have been comparable to this ancient city. No
present-day city can compare with this...
As they came closer to the fortress and its gates, the
crowds going towards the city increased. Tamils and
Sinhala’s, monks and householders, men and women, boys,
and girls -- they walked in groups and swarms.
All
appeared to be a jubilant crowd bent upon a carnival. Some
among them noticed our friends the travelers and began
pointing and whispering. On seeing this, Ponniyin Selvan
made a sign to his two companions and turned into a lane
leading away from the Royal way. He stopped beneath a
grove of trees enclosing a man-made hillock.
He looked at his friends and said, "The horses have
come a long way. Let them rest awhile. We can go into the
city after darkness."

All three dismounted and went to sit on some rocks.
"Why are these groups of people going into the city? Is
there some festival in the fortress today?" asked Vandiya
Devan.
"The biggest and most important among all festivals in
this country is being held today," said Prince Arulmozli.
"I thought that a war was going on in Eezlam! Here,
everything seems to be one big carnival!" said Vandiya
Devan Vallavarayan.
"Did you not say that the people of Pazlayarai were
celebrating Sri Jayanthi Festival?"
"Yes; but Pazlayarai is in Chozla Country ...."
"Anuradhapura is in Lanka. So what? Sundara Chozla
rules the Chozla Nation; his good rule encompasses Lanka
also!"
"But enemies abound in this island country ...."
"Enemies do exist. Somewhere... What can these
people do about that? Battles have to be fought on
battlefields. Cities must continue with carnivals. What do
you say Thirumalai?"
Thirumalai Nambi Azlvar-adiyan spoke, "Here we have
openly declared enemies; there the enemies are hidden,
concealed conspirators. The secret adversary is more
dangerous than an opponent in the open. Therefore, my
humble suggestion is that this Prince should continue in
Lanka conducting campaigns and carnivals."
"Absurd! If concealed enemies are more dangerous
than open enemies, our Prince should be there. Brave men
should face dangers and meet all obstacles," said Vandiya
Devan.
"Bravery does not mean that a person should foolishly
get embroiled with traitorous conspirators and assassins.

Why don’t you -- the bravest among brave -- go there and
get involved? Why did you escape to this island?" asked
Thirumalai.
"Stop it! Both of you, do not begin bickering." Prince
Arulmozli calmed them down.
The three men entered the City of Anuradhapura after
nightfall. On that festive evening no traveler was denied
entry at the gates. All walked in freely with no questions
asked. The guards merely stood by the side. Our three
friends mingled with the crowds and went in without being
remarked.
Crowds filled the streets of the inner city. "Peace!
Peace!" the cries filled the skies. Vandiya Devan noticed
several mansions and multi-storey buildings in various
stages of disrepair and ruin. Here and there, some
dilapidated buildings were renovated. He realized that all
such renovation and rebuilding must have been due to
orders from the Prince. Why was he doing such things?
Why is he so partial to these conquered people? These
Lankan kings have been quarrelling and fighting Tamils
from the mainland for nearly a thousand years. Instead of
looting and razing the enemy capital, why is this Prince
rebuilding and holding carnivals? There is some mystery
about this. What could it be?
A peculiar thought occurred to Vandiya Devan. Yes,
yes! it must be so! He has no rights in Chozla homelands.
Aditya Karikala is already the declared Crown Prince;
Prince Madurandaka has already risen as a challenge to
him. Therefore, he perhaps wishes to establish an
independent kingdom for his own self in this great island of
Lanka. Who knows? His wishes may come true! Remember
the Astrologer of Kudanthai! `Prince Arulmozli Varma is
like the Pole Star. There is no want for those who trust

him!’ Vandiya Devan’s heart brimmed with happiness upon
having joined the company of such a brave Prince.
They came and halted at the front portal of an old
mansion with crumbling outer walls and darkened
windows. The street was a little away from the main roads
and therefore quite deserted. They dismounted and walked
towards the door. Prince Arulmozli clapped his hands thrice
and as if by magic, a door opened on one side of that
mansion in ruins. The building seemed completely
uninhabited. Ponniyin Selvan walked into that darkness.
Vandiya Devan looked back and wondered about the
horses.
The Prince said, "These horses know their way, come!"
He took hold of Vandiya Devan’s hand and led him into the
building. They walked a few yards down a dark passage. A
light glimmered in the distance and soon brightened.
Vandiya Devan realized that they were in the innermost
courtyards of an ancient palace.
"We have to be a little careful in these rooms. These
are the private chambers of Emperor Maha Sena. The
Emperor might appear suddenly and try to chase us away!"
spoke Prince Arulmozli.
"Who is Maha Sena?" asked Vandiya Devan.
"Maha Sena was the Emperor who ruled this Kingdom
of Lanka six hundred years ago. He performed various acts
of welfare for his people. Therefore, people believe that his
spirit still roams the streets of this ancient city. Even now,
people tie pieces of cloth to tree branches so that his ghost
may not shiver with cold. After him, no one has lived in this
palace; they have left it unoccupied."
Servants appeared to help the Prince and his
companions. Refreshed after a bath and a simple meal, they
went up to the terrace. They could see all around and

below; they could not be seen by anyone standing below on
the streets. They sat down in that secluded terrace.
Vandiya Devan asked, "Sir, you said that the Monolith
Buddha had asked you to go someplace at midnight?"
"We have plenty of time. The moon has just risen.
When the moon comes in line with that Daagaba spire we
can leave," said Prince Arulmozli. He was pointing towards
a large hillock like Daagaba spire. Because such largedomed crypts were raised over the sacred relics - mortal
remains such as teeth and pieces of bone -- of Lord Buddha,
they were known as Daadhu Garbha’s (relic wombs). In the
course of time the word became `Daagaba’.
"Why did they build such huge sepulchers?" asked
Vandiya Devan.
"In the beginning they built huge edifices to indicate
the greatness of Lord Buddha. Later Kings built even
bigger edifices to show off their own greatness," laughed
the Prince.
Very soon a roaring sound like the sea in a storm was
heard in the distance. Vandiya Devan turned to see a huge
multitude of people -- like an endless ocean of men -moving continuously down the streets. In the midst of that
sea of people were hundreds of humongous, whale-like
elephants. Like twinkling stars reflecting over dark seas,
several lighted torches cast a glow of light. People seemed
to number in millions.
"What is this? It seems like an enemy invasion!" said
Vandiya Devan with some agitation.
"No, no! This is the biggest festival of Lanka -- The
Perahara Carnival."
As the festive procession approached closer and closer,
Vandiya Devan’s astonishment increased. He had never
seen anything like it before.

First came about thirty elephants walking in
formation. All were decorated with rich, golden face plates.
The elephant in the middle was bigger and more dignified
than the rest; its decorations were even richer and it
carried a large jeweled-gold casket on its back. A gold
canopy protected the casket. Buddhist monks rode upon
the other elephants surrounding this central-elephant. The
monks held deer-tail whisks with silver handles and fanned
the casket. Several men carrying torches, flags and
intricately wrought swinging lamps walked amidst these
elephants. The golden face-plates of the elephants and their
richly embellished decorations as well as the jeweled
whisks in the hands of those monks shone like stars in that
light. A large dancing crowd followed the elephants. About
a hundred people in the midst of that group were costumed
in curious fashions as they danced to the tunes of little
hand drums. Others were playing on cymbals, blowing on
horns and other unfamiliar instruments. It was a frenzied,
fantastic dance. The frenzied dance of the Divine-man and
Divine-woman of Kadamboor was nothing compared to this.
Sometimes the dancers jumped up in swirls, twirling in the
air swiftly, two or three times before landing on their
frenzied feet. When they swirled in this fashion, their
pleated skirts embellished with tassels bunched like balls of
flowers, opened and ballooned like colorful umbrellas.
Two eyes were insufficient to view this picturesque
sight. At least two thousand eyes were needed! Two
thousand ears would be insufficient to hear the music and
din raised by the instruments that accompanied the
dancers. Two million ears would not suffice! The din raised
by the drums, cymbals, horns, wind-pipes, tambourines,
deafened the ears.
When this contingent of people had moved ahead
another group of thirty elephants followed; richly decorated
as before. A beautiful casket reposed on the large elephant

in the middle of this formation also. A golden canopy was
held over the casket. Monks on surrounding elephants
waved their snow-white whisks. Dancers followed this
formation of elephants also. The people in this crowd
seemed to be costumed in various attires like Hindu Gods
of Love, Rathi and Manmatha, like Shiva and his followers.
Frenzied dancers surrounded them.
"What is this? How did Lord Shiva appear here?" asked
Vandiya Devan with some surprise.
"King Gaja Bahu of Lanka invited Shiva. After that,
Lord Shiva has stayed here adamantly!" replied Arulmozli.
"Look at this you fanatic Nambi! Do you now realize
who is the greatest of Gods?" before Vandiya Devan could
finish his question, another group of elephants and dancers
followed. The dancers behind this formation were masked
like eagles with sharp beaks and feathered wings. They too,
jumped and swirled in the air as they danced.
"My dear man, did you see. Look at our Lord Vishnu
making his presence on his divine vehicle the eagleGaruda," said Azlvar-adiyan.
Another elephant group followed. The dancers in this
formation carried sharp swords and lances in their hands.
They danced a frightful war-dance. The swords and spears
in their hands clashed with a reverberating sound that kept
time to the music being raised around them. After all this,
the group of dancers following the last formation of
elephants danced with silambu sticks in different poses of
the ancient martial art of defense. For some moments their
dance was a ferocious rhythm at other times it was a
graceful gentle art form.
Prince Arulmozli explained the history and significance
of this colorful festival to Vandiya Devan who was
captivated by the sights and sounds in the streets below.

There were times when the kings of Lanka and the
monarchs of the Tamil countries, maintained friendship.
Gaja Bahu of Lanka Island and Senguttuvan of the Chera
Country were friends. Once, when Chera Senguttuvan
celebrated the festival of Kannagi the patroness of chastity,
Gaja Bahu was an honored guest. He enjoyed the other
festivals being celebrated in the mainland. Later when his
friend Senguttuvan visited Lanka, Gaja Bahu held a festival.
He held a single carnival in honor of the Tamil deities
Shiva, Vishnu, Murugan, and Kannagi. When he saw the joy
and jubilance expressed by his people during the festivities,
he decided to hold such a festival every year. The place of
honor, the first place was given to Lord Buddha and the
other divinities were made to follow in the festival
procession. Since that time the festival has become part of
the culture of the Singhalese people of Lanka and the
Perahara Festival is being held every year without
interruption.
"But I did not see any idol or figure of any divinity?"
asked Vandiya Devan.
"Did you notice the jeweled casket placed on the
prominent middle elephant in each group?"
"I did. Did they lock up the deities in each of those
golden caskets? Did they not want the Gods to escape and
go back home?"
Ponniyin Selvan replied laughingly, "Nothing like that!
In the first casket they have safely locked up a tooth of
Lord Buddha. It is the priceless treasure revered by every
person of the Buddhist faith in this country. They place that
holy relic in a beautiful casket and carry it in procession."
"What is inside those other caskets that followed?"
"They could not find any teeth of Shiva, Vishnu,
Murugan or Kannagi. Therefore, they carry the sacred

jewels used to decorate the respective idols in the
respective temples."
Vandiya Devan was lost in thought for some time. "Ah!
If only Lord Pazluvoor had come to conquer this island
instead of you ....."
At that time the tail end of the procession had turned
the street corner; the noisy din of dancers and musical
instruments as well as the roaring sounds of the crowd
began to die down.
"We have just half an hour left for our appointment.
Come let us go!" said Prince Arulmozli. They came down to
the street level and began walking in a direction away from
the procession. Since everyone was involved with the
carnival procession, the streets through which they walked
were deserted. Very soon they reached the raised banks of
a spreading lake. The lake was brimming with water, gentle
waves lapping at the shores. Moonbeams skipped over
those soft waves making them threads of molten silver.
They climbed down the bank entering a well laid garden;
fragrance of champaka flowers assailed their noses; they
could see bunches of white flowers dangling like silver bells
on short bushes. Man-made hillocks and reflecting pools
could be seen here and there. One such elevated pool was
carved like the face of a roaring lion: a cascade of water
flowed out of its mouth to form another pool. The three
men waited beside this pool.
Vandiya Devan recalled the monolith by the wayside
near the gates of Anuradhapura. The Prince had counted
the lotus buds by the feet of the statue -- twelve buds
indicating twelve o’clock. They were not flowers but buds
indicating night. He remembered the lion spouted flask by
the feet -- indication of this Lion Falls Lake. All this is fine!
But why and who has ordered the Prince to come here? I
wonder what dangers it may involve? Why did the Prince

prevent me from bringing any weapons? Perhaps this is
some sort of a rendezvous in some affair of the heart?
Following this thought an agitation rippled through
Vandiya Devan’s heart. His mind flew across the sea
towards Pazlayarai -- Younger Pirati Kundavai and Lady
Vanathi appeared in his mind’s eye. He tried to glean
something by making the Prince talk. "Sir, this place seems
like some private garden of some old palace."
Arulmozli said, "Yes, this was a palace garden. King
Dhutta Gamanu’s palace was beside this garden a thousand
years ago. Look over there you can see the indestructible
ruins of that old palace."
Vandiya Devan looked at those terraces in ruins and
said, "Those could have been courtyards where princesses
danced. Those beauties might have enjoyed water games in
these very pools!"
"There is another astonishing story about this garden.
It happened a thousand years ago. Dhutta Gamanu’s son
Saali was walking in these gardens one afternoon. He saw
a girl fetching water from these pools in a pot and watering
the flowering plants. He fell in love with her. He found that
she was a low-caste woman and that her name was
Ashokamaala. He insisted upon marrying her in spite of her
lowly social position. `Then you cannot ascend the throne!’
roared the father. `I do not care for the throne; I love
Ashokamaala!’ insisted the resolute son. Do you think any
other Prince in this world can say a thing like that?" asked
Arulmozli Varma.
Vandiya Devan remembered The Ocean Princess who
rowed her boat at Kodi Karai. Aha! Is this Prince telling me
this story with thoughts of that girl...? How can I raise a
comment about Poonkuzlali.... Even as Vandiya Devan
pondered about it, an astonishing thing happened. The wall
behind the cascade from the roaring Lion’s mouth was

carved into a cave with a ledge for seating two persons. A
light appeared suddenly in that cave. A hand holding the
lamp appeared first; then the austere face of a Buddhist
monk appeared.
Vandiya Devan stood openmouthed as he watched this
magical display. He held his breath wondering what could
happen after that.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 35 -- Lanka’s Throne
The Monk looked around here and there for a minute,
in the light of the lamp he held. Perhaps he recognized the
Prince and his companions standing by the shore. The lamp
and its light disappeared and very soon they could see the
Monk coming up the steps of the lake. He came and stood
in front of the Prince and examined his face.
"Beloved of the Gods, welcome! Welcome! The
Vaithulya Confederation of Monks awaits you. Our
Great Leader, the Maha-thero is also present. My heart is
overjoyed and thankful that you have come at the
appointed hour."
"Sire, I know that as a youngster I have several faults
in me. Even so, I have been observing the code that I shall
never fail my given word or promise. I have not failed in the
observance of this code."
"You had not arrived till sunset. I was somewhat
concerned because of that!"
"If I had entered the City before sunset, I may not have
been able to keep my promise. I have come to the
appointment."
"Surely! Cloud groups wander to hide the shining light
of the sky; we know that. But all those clouds are scattered
by the gentle breeze that is Lord Buddha’s mercy. Who are
these men standing here? Do you know them well? Are they
completely trustworthy? Will they be bound by the pledge?"
asked the Monk.
"Sire, I trust these two friends of mine as I trust my
own two hands. Even so, if you do not like it, I am willing to
leave them here and come with you, alone," said Arulmozli.
"Oh no! I am not ready to accept that great a
responsibility. I am taking you to a very safe and secure

place. But we have to go a long way and who knows what
danger lurks behind what pillar? They must surely
accompany you."
Vandiya Devan was puzzled by this conversation. He
was very pleased about the Prince having such complete
trust in a stranger like him and about his being included in
an obviously secret mission of some sort. What was the
important, secret event that was about to take place that
night? The thought was disturbing.
The Monk went ahead leading the way as they
followed. They went down the steps and entered the cave
behind the cascade. The Monk felt along one wall and did
something when a doorway appeared with a good light
beyond. The Monk picked up a lamp and after all three men
had come in, the entrance was closed. They could faintly
hear the sound of the waterfall outside. But for the sound,
none could imagine that they had been standing beside a
waterfall some moments ago.
They walked into a narrow tunnel that twisted and
turned for quite some distance; it seemed endless. Their
footsteps echoed in sinister sounds. Vandiya Devan
wondered if the Prince had been duped into some wicked
conspiracy. The passage began to widen and finally ended
in a huge vaulted chamber. The meager light cast by the
lamp in the Monk’s hand revealed only a small part of that
huge chamber. But he could see its several pillars made of
marble. Lord Buddha’s statues were everywhere: standing
Buddhas, reclining Buddhas, meditating Buddhas, blessing
Buddhas, laughing Buddhas and praying Buddhas ...
countless figures filled every nook and cranny.
They walked through this marble vault and entered
another narrow passage. Soon another large chamber -- its
pillars were encased in shining copper, glowing ruby red.
Even the roof of this chamber was clad in copper; beautiful

frescoes adorned the ceiling and walls. More statues of
Buddha all around... In this fashion they crossed several
more chambers, a chamber made of some unique yellow
wood, an ivory chamber, a bejeweled golden chamber. Even
though they were walking at a fast pace, Vandiya Devan did
not fail to feel the textures of pillars and walls in all these
rooms. He was surprised that the Prince did not cast a
second glance at any of these wonders but was walking
straight ahead. Finally, they reached an austere,
unembellished granite chamber which presented quite an
unusual spectacle.
Not a single human being had been found in all the
previous rooms which had been crammed with Buddha
statues. But this granite room was filled with monks of
serene countenance and shining face. Their Great Master
Maha-thero was seated on a dais before them. A jeweled,
golden throne was before him. On a table beside the throne
reposed a tray with a pearl-crown, a shining sword and
jewelled mace. Lights shone from all corners of this
chamber. The throne, crown, mace and sword sparkled in
that light. When Prince Arulmozli and his companions
entered this assembly, the monks stood up and raised these
slogans, "May Buddha prevail! May the Law prevail! May
the Order prevail!"
The Prince walked up to the Master and bowed
respectfully. The Master pointed to an ordinary seat by his
side and asked the Prince to be seated.
"Revered Sire, I beg that you who are elder to me in
years and in virtue be seated before me," said Arulmozli.
When the Great Master was seated, Arulmozli also sat
down on the seat pointed to him.
"Great Prince who is Beloved of the Gods, this Great
Congregation of Buddhists is happy to have your presence
amongst them. You agreed to all our conditions and have

come here after much effort. No other proof is needed to
show that Lord Buddha has absolute mercy for you." The
Master spoke these words in the Paali language and the
Monk who had been the guide interpreted in Tamil. All the
monks in the congregation endorsed with cheers of "Peace!
Peace!" and showed their happiness.
Master Maha-thero continued to speak: "We are
always obligated to Barata Varsha (India) which has given
us our Buddhist faith. But since ancient times, the Chozlas,
Cheras, Pandiyas and Kalingas who invaded our land have
executed many acts of atrocity on us and our land. They
became subject to the curse of the Divine Ones because
they destroyed our Buddha Temples, our mansions,
monasteries, and dwellings. Why cite people from your
country... even kings of our own have performed such
barbarous deeds. They created a division amongst the
Order of our Congregation. They destroyed the temples and
monasteries of monks who opposed their villainy; they fed
our accomplishments and arts to fire. In this great city
which is two leagues long and one league wide, once upon
a time half the area was covered with Buddha Viharas
(temples). Most of those edifices are in ruin today. Till this
day, no scion of a royal house has ordered that these ruined
places of worship be restored or rebuilt. It has been the
good fortune of Prince Arulmozli to give such an order. This
great Order of Buddhists appreciates this gesture of yours
O’ Beloved of the Gods! ..."
The Prince bowed his head and accepted these good
wishes from the Master.
"To continue... for many years now, there have been
obstacles, and the Perahara Festival could not be held in
this city. The Pandiyas had once captured this city about a
hundred years ago. At that time, the Lankan monarchs
moved to Pulastiya City. Since then, Perahara was not held
here. In this worthy year you have ordered that the great

festival could be held again. You made it convenient to hold
the carnival by making arrangements. We of the Order are
extremely happy about this..."
Prince Arulmozli inclined his head once again and said,
"Great Sire, if I could be of any other service to the
Buddhist Order, kindly command me!"
Master Maha-thero smiled, "Yes Prince! This Order of
Buddhists is confidently expecting more services from you.
But I have something more to say before that. You may be
aware that before his last incarnation as our prophet, Lord
Buddha has had several previous incarnations. At one time
he was born as Emperor Sibi in this world full of cruelty, to
reveal the greatness of Ahimsa (kindness to all living
things). To save the life of a small dove, he chopped pieces
of flesh from his own chest and placed them on the
weighing balance. You men of the Chozla clan claim decent
from Emperor Sibi; you even bear the title `Sembiyan’ to
remember this ancestor; but we of the Order did not
recognize this claim. We believed that your claims were
stories made up by your holy men. Now, -- after witnessing
your great and good deeds -- we have to accept that you
Chozlas are true decedents of Emperor Sibi. Illusion had
made the Chozlas forget the merciful qualities of Buddha.
But that merciful grace has descended upon you. Look...."
He turned to look behind him when some monks
carried another monk who was reposing on a plank and
brought him to the dais. The reclining monk’s body was
shivering constantly. His limbs shivered, his head shook,
teeth chattered and lips trembled; even the eyebrows
above the reddened eyes twitched.
"The thirty and three million divinities we believe in
have descended upon this monk. Please listen to what the
merciful Gods proclaim!" said the Great Master.

The delirious monk uttered some garbled sounds in
quick succession; his words were utterly incomprehensible.
But when had stopped, the Master spoke, "The Gods bless
you. In ancient times Ashoka the Great, who was Beloved of
the Gods ruled all of India under one canopy and spread
the word of our Lord to all the world. The Gods decree that
you shall one day rule a great empire like that. They wish
that you too shall spread the word of Buddha to all the
world, just like Ashoka of yore. They order that the virtuous
deeds performed by Ashoka from his throne in Pataliputra
should be begun and accomplished by you from this ancient
throne of Anuradhapura. Prince, what is your reply to this
decree of the Divine Ones?"
"Great Sire, the Divine Ones are all powerful; they
dictate and are capable of getting their intentions fulfilled.
But my humble mind is not able to comprehend their orders
for me at this present time," replied the Chozla Prince.
"I can explain!" said the great Master as he made a
sign; the monks carried the delirious celibate away from
the dais.
"Prince, look at this throne before you. Look at the
crown and the mace. Every monarch of Lanka was
accepted as a lawful ruler by the Monastic Congregations
of Lanka only after they were crowned on this throne while
holding this mace and sword. This is the throne on which
Dhutta Gamanu, Thissa the Beloved of Gods, Maha Sena
and other great kings were crowned. This is the jeweled
crown that graced their heads; this is the just mace borne
by their hands. This ancient throne -- a throne that bore law
abiding kings over thousands of years -- this throne awaits
you. Are you willing to sit on this throne, wear this crown
and wield this mace and sword?"
Vandiya Devan who had been listening with rapt
attention became very agitated on hearing these words of

Master Maha-thero. He wondered about placing the Prince
upon that throne that very instant ... however, there was
not even a trace of change on Prince Arulmozli’s facial
expression.
Like before, he spoke very calmly, "Great Sire, how can
that be possible? The King who sat on this throne and was
crowned with these jewels is still alive; even if we do not
know his whereabouts..."
"Prince, the Gods have ordained that the dynasty that
rules Lanka has to change. It has to happen. Several great
kings have appeared in this dynasty established by Vijayaraje who came from Bengal where the Ganga flows; they
have been upholders of law and order. In later years men of
this dynasty committed various heinous deeds and earned
the curses of the Divine Ones. Fathers in this dynasty killed
their own sons; sons murdered their fathers; brother killed
brother; life giving mothers killed their offspring. The Gods
declare that this dynasty which has committed such awful
deeds is not fit to rule and uphold Buddhist faith and law.
The last crowned king has lost his rights to Lanka’s throne;
neither does he have any children or other decedents.
Therefore, the dynasty has to change anyway. When such a
dynastic change has to take place, this Congregation of
Buddhists has the right to select the first of the new
dynasty. We of this great Congregation wish to select you. If
you accept, we are ready to crown you this very night."
The most profound silence prevailed in that assembly
for some time. Vandiya Devan was completely flustered.
Prince Arulmozli rose from his seat and greeted the
assembly of monks with folded palms. Vandiya Devan was
beyond limits of exhilaration -- he was ready to pick up the
crown and place it on the Prince’s head with his own hands.
The Prince said, "Great Sires, I bow to you. I
appreciate your magnanimity in presenting this ancient

throne to me because of the love and trust you have for me,
a mere youngster. But your orders are beyond my capacity
to fulfill. I was born and raised in Chozla country. The food
grown in those lands and the water flowing in the rivers of
that country nourished this body of mine. I came here to
this island in obedience to orders of my father Emperor
Sundara Chozla. I cannot do anything without consulting
his wishes."
The Master interrupted, "Prince, do you not know that
these days your father is without any freedom, like a
prisoner?"
"Yes; my father is unwell and on a sickbed; he has lost
the use of his legs. Even then, I am bound by the orders of
those who rule in his name and with his approval. If I
accept this throne without their consent, I would be a
traitor to my country and my king."
"If you think that, we are ready to send an ambassador
to Tanjavur. Your father has a fondness for the Buddhist
faith. He will not reject our petition."
"What about the people of this land? Who can have the
right to distribute their country without their approval?"
"The people of this country will consider it to be the
greatest of their good fortunes to have you as their king."
"They may all agree and be happy. In this whole world
more than any other opinion, I honor the words and wishes
of my elder sister. My mother gave birth to me; River Ponni
saved my life; but my sister nurtured my intellect and
opened my mind. But even more important than her wishes
is the command of a voice in my heart. My inner voice does
not tell me to accept this exalted fortune that you Sires are
bestowing on this youngster. I beg you to forgive me."
A silence reigned in that assembly once again.
own heartbeat sounded very loud to Vandiya Devan.

His

After a while, the Master spoke once again, "Prince,
your words do not surprise us; in a way, I expected it. This
shows that you more than anyone deserve Lanka’s Throne.
We, who know the law of righteousness need no further
proof; but we do not wish to force you. We shall give you
time. We will send for you in this same fashion after one
year. At that time give us your final answer. Remember this:
in this ancient Anuradhapura, several old Buddhist shrines
and monasteries have been reduced to rubble and ruin. Till
this day no harm has befallen this Great Bhodi Monastery
because it is secreted in the wombs of the earth deep
underground. Only these leaders of various Buddhist
Congregations who live here know the way to come in here.
None except those led by one of us can enter here. Only
once in their lifetime, when they are to be crowned by the
Great Buddhist Congregation, are the Monarchs of Lanka
invited to come here. This is an unique Vihara with such
secret entrances. You should not reveal anything about
your coming or going from here or about anything that
happened here to anyone else. Do not share this secret
even with your friends. If you disobey you will be subject to
terrible curses."
"Great Sire! There is no need for curses. I had already
pledged to not reveal these secrets to anyone outside
before I came here with my friends. I shall never break my
given pledge," said Ponniyin Selvan.
After half an hour, Prince Arulmozli, Azlvar-adiyan and
Vandiya Devan were once again walking down the moon-lit
streets of Anuradhapura. Vandiya Devan who had kept his
mouth tightly shut during all the time inside the monastery,
unbound all his chaotic thoughts.
"Of course, the Chozla country is very bounteous; but
it can never compare with this Lanka. How could you
discard the throne of such a jewel of an island which was
willingly presented to you? Why this foolishness? On the

other hand, what can one say about the judgment of those
monks in that monastery? There I was... standing like
another pillar right next to you... Why did they not make
the offer to me?"
Prince Arulmozli smiled, "Remember, I told you that
Dhutta Gamanu’s son Saali gave up this Lanka’s Throne for
the love of Ashokamaala; Did you not hear that?"
"I heard it all! My Lord, which girl has captured your
love like that? Which girl prevents you from accepting a
throne?"
"Not one -- but two girls: Truth and Law. I am in love
with both these girls. I refused Lanka’s Crown because of
them."
"Prince, you seem to be a young man; but you speak
like an aged philosopher."
"Who knows about who is the older among us or whose
life will end how soon?"
Whilst talking in this fashion, they were walking by an
old mansion beside the street. They heard someone clap
their hands across the street. A figure stood over there.
"Come with me!" said the Prince as he crossed the
street and went towards that figure. The other two
followed. When they were halfway across that wide street,
a loud rumbling was heard behind them. On looking back,
they saw that the facade of the old mansion was crumbling
and falling down. If they had not turned to cross the street,
the rubble would have fallen and buried them. In one
instant three lives were saved. And such special lives too!
How true were the words of Prince Arulmozli who had
been saying `Who among us knows whose life will end how
soon?’ Vandiya Devan stood in the middle of the street
looking at the rubble and wondering, while the other two
had gone ahead. When he turned to join them, he could see

the person who stood there, clearly in the moonlight. A
doubt, should he believe the sight before his eyes or should
he not? How stupid? How can it ever be possible? How
could Nandini whom he had seen in her palace at Tanjavur
have come here to these streets of Anuradhapura? Why
should she come and stand here in the night like this! In an
instant that figure disappeared like magic. Only two men
stood by the street.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 36 -- Is Merit Honored?
Vandiya Devan walked quickly towards the spot where
`Nandini’ was standing with Prince Arulmozli. Doubts
assailed him even as he stepped across -- Is she really
Nandini? She is not bejewelled and dressed like the YoungQueen... She looks like an ascetic wearing simple cloth. Her
face is very similar to Nandini’s; but there seems to be
some difference ... Even before he reached that spot across
the street, the woman had moved into the shadows cast by
the houses and vanished. Vandiya Devan tried to follow her
when the Prince took hold of his hand and stopped him.
"My Lord,
familiar!"

who

was

that

woman?

She

seemed

Azlvar-adiyan said, "That woman must surely be the
Divine Protectress of the Chozlas! Look at that! If we had
not crossed the street, we would have reached the
Hallowed Feet of Lord Buddha by now."
They looked at the spot across the street and saw a
small hillock of rubble formed by the crumbling facade of
the old mansion. The rubble could have easily buried a
large elephant -- three tiny men would be nothing...
"Our Divine-guardian-mother appeared at the right
time and saved our lives!" said Arulmozli.
"Sir! What did you say? Were you referring to that
woman?" asked Vandiya Devan with some surprise.
"What did you think? Why were you trying to follow
her?" asked Ponniyin Selvan.
Vandiya Devan said, "Mr. Nambi called her the Divine
Protectress of the Chozlas. To me, she seemed like an evil
spirit that has come to menace the Chozlas."
"You mean ... Whom did you think she was?"

"Perhaps it was my imagination. I thought she was
Lady Nandini, the younger wife married by Lord Pazluvoor.
Did you both not think it?"
"I did not see her properly. You must be imagining
things; how could the Young-Queen of Pazluvoor come
here?" asked Azlvar-adiyan.
"This gentleman’s conjecture is not unwarranted. Eyes
cannot lie; I too have seen the surprising facial
resemblance sometimes. Come, let us talk as we go," said
the Prince.
Instead of walking by the side in the shadows cast by
the buildings, the three men began walking down the
middle of the street brightened by moonlight. After some
time, Azlvar-adiyan asked, "Sir, what did that woman who
beckoned you by clapping her hands, say to you?"
"She said that two enemies have come in search of me
and that they are waiting for an opportunity to kill me."
Vandiya Devan was shocked, "Wretched fiend! Does
she mean us?"
Arulmozli said laughingly, "No, she did not specifically
refer to you both. I am not concerned even if it is you. She
has said that I have a very strong life. She has saved my life
several times before this."
"Sir, I think I know who those enemies are. They are
two men who came with Lord Parthiban Pallava, looking for
you. Two figures appeared on the terrace of that crumbling
mansion; it must have been those men."
"Mr. Nambi! Why did you not say this till now! You
both walk ahead; I’ll go back and search that building."
Vandiya Devan was turning back as he spoke. Prince
Arulmozli stopped him once again by taking his hand.
"There is no need for hurry. You can never find them in
that old house. We can examine that place later. I suggest

that you remain by my side till I order otherwise. Do you
understand? Who knows what other danger lurks in the
nooks and corners of this crumbling city? Brave Sir, I
trusted you and did not bring any other man to be my
guard. What shall I do if you desert me like this in the
middle of the street?" asked Arulmozli.
Vandiya Devan was touched by these moving words.
With a trembling tongue he replied, "Sir, I shall not move
from your side even for one moment!"
"And I shall not depart from your side! You guard the
Prince and I shall guard you," said Azlvar-adiyan Nambi!
Very soon, the three friends reached the courtyard of
Maha Sena’s ancient palace. In a large room, three oldfashioned beds had been readied for them. Moonbeams
danced through the wide window that took up all of one
wall.
"Lanka’s emperors and princes and their noble ladies
would have slept here in this very palace, perhaps in this
very room, several hundred years ago. These moonbeams
would have peeped through this very same window even at
that time. Now, when these moonbeams see us ordinary
mortals in this chamber, they would be disappointed! What
do think of that Sir?" asked Prince Arulmozli as he looked
at Vandiya Devan.
"Sir, you may refer to yourself and to this Mr. Nambi in
whatever fashion you wish. But do not refer to me as an
ordinary mortal!" said Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan.
"Forgive me! I had forgotten! Are you not a prince
born of the noble Vaanar Clan of Vallam ..."
"Yes Sir! Yes. This Mr. Nambi may die of jealousy if he
hears the song composed by the bards in honor of my
ancestor."

"It does not matter. Thirumalai is a lover of Tamil
poetry. He will not hesitate giving up his very life for the
sake of a poem, just like Prince Nandi-varma Pallava of
yore. What is that poem? Can you recite it?"
Vandiya Devan recited the following poem with some
hesitation.
My canopy, my palanquin,
My armor and my pennant
This my elephant and this my steed
Thus cry those crowned princes.
Laden with liberal gifts
bestowed by Great King Vaanan,
Leave these princes of poetry,
bemoaned by mere monarchs of earth.

Ponniyin Selvan who heard these lines said,
"Thirumalai, you are an expert in Tamil literature. What is
the meaning of these lines?"
"Sir, you are quizzing me! Anyway, I’ll try and explain.
Several princes waited in the outer courtyard of Great King
Vaanan’s palace hoping for a glimpse of the king. They
could not get an appointment easily because the bards who
were princes in poetry had already entered the court. King
Vaanan was pleased with their compositions and he sent
them away with lavish gifts. Tasseled canopies, ivory
palanquins, jeweled armor, caskets of treasures, elephants
and horses were given away as rewards to those poets. The
princes who waited in the outer courtyard saw those gifts
being carried away by the poets and cried out in jealous
rage. `Oh dear, that is my canopy, that is my palanquin;
here goes my elephant and there is your prize horse. Look
at those jewels given to these wretched poets!’ cried the
princes. King Vaanan had given away as gifts those very
treasures that had been brought as tribute by those
monarchs and princes. Sir, is my interpretation of the
poem, correct?" asked Azlvar-adiyan Thirumalai Nambi.

"How can your explanation be wrong? What a fantastic
poem! Such subtle imagination; I wonder who was the poet
who composed this incredible piece of verse! O’ you Prince
of the Vaanar Clan, Lord Vandiya Devan of Vallam, I do not
care if the kingdom ruled by your ancestors was big or
small. They were great enough to have such a song
composed in their honor. Who needs more fame than that?
Yes; you who are a scion of that clan are worthy of sleeping
in these chambers. Why be satisfied with Maha Sena’s bed?
If Emperor Dhutta Gamanu’s bed could be procured, you
deserve that. You are truly worthy of such greatness!"
"Yes sir! I am truly worthy of great homage. But in
these days who honor’s merit? Did those monks offer
Lanka’s crown to me? They merely offered to you who were
likely to refuse it. Do you know how angry I was at that
time? I felt like taking that crown and placing it on my own
head and crowning myself. I kept quiet because this fanatic
Mr. Nambi might want a share."
Prince Arulmozli laughed joyously upon hearing this.
Vandiya Devan was gladdened by that laughter. He
continued in a similar vein of pretended anger, "What is the
point in laughing it off? How can that solve anything?"
"Sir, O’ Lord Vaanar of Vallam, don’t you remember my
speaking about Truth and Law? Did they not seem
sufficient explanation to you?"
"I already had some doubts about Truth and Law. I
now declare that I shall have no traffic with them and shall
in no way be partial to them."
"Dear Lord! Why? Why do you declare this? Why are
you angry with Truth and Law?"
"I have no anger with them. You said that you were in
love with those two girls -- Truth and Law. You said that you
gave up this kingdom for their love. Even in my mind will I
not consider women who are loved by another."

Ponniyin Selvan laughed uproariously once again, "I
have never met a jokester like you."
"Sir, everything is a joke to you; I am burning with
anger. If you did not care for the throne of Lanka, you could
have looked at me, standing there beside you, and said,
`Give it to him!’ Why did you not do that?"
After he had finished laughing, Prince Arulmozli said,
"Sir, is it such an easy thing to accept a kingdom?
Moreover, it is in no way correct to accept it when awarded
by Buddhist monks. It would lead to later complications;
religious leaders should stick to religion. If religious
leaders interfere in politics, it spells doom for the faith as
well as the kingdom. Besides, these monks who came
forward to offer me the kingdom tonight do not represent
all the Buddhist congregations in this country. They are
leaders of one group. There are two other equally powerful
congregations. If I accept the kingdom from them, I have to
rule according to their wishes. The other two congregations
will immediately become our enemies."
Azlvar-adiyan asked, "Does the Lord of Vallam now
understand the situation here?"
"I understand pretty well. Like the quarrels about the
relative greatness of Shiva and Vishnu in the mainland
there are quarrels here too!"
"Both of you don’t begin your quarrels here. It is very
late; I can hear the people coming back from the Perahara
celebrations. Let us go to sleep."
"I cannot sleep. Only when I know the identity of that
woman who beckoned us across the street, and saved us
from an instant grave, will I be able to sleep."
"Even now, I do not know who she is. But I can tell you
everything I know about her; if interested, come closer
both of you, and sit beside me."

***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 37 -- Goddess Cauvery
Vandiya Devan and Azlvar-adiyan rose with eagerness
and went to sit beside Prince Arulmozli’s bed. The Prince
began speaking:
"When I was a young child, I went on a boating trip on
the Cauvery with my parents. My sister and brother were
also in that boat with us. They talked of various things
amongst themselves. I was leaning over the side looking at
the swirls of water passing beside the barge, fascinated by
the kadamba flowers caught in the eddies. My heart was
pained by the sight of those tiny flowers caught helplessly
in those relentless swirls of water. I would bend down over
the side and try to save those flowers.... when accidently I
fell into the river! Since I fell headfirst, I could not steady
myself....
"Even now, I remember my head bumping on the sandy
river bed. I remember the swift current carrying me
downstream and some distant cries of distress from the
boat which had gone far away. I struggled for breath even
as I knew that Cauvery was going to carry me away to
some distant ocean. I knew that my parents, sister and
brother would be inconsolable. Just then, someone lifted
me up with their two hands. I was above water in one
instant. I was dripping water from everywhere -- my nose,
mouth ears and eyes. Even so, I saw the face of the person
who had saved me. In those few seconds, that face was
embossed in my mind. She seemed familiar; but I could not
recognize her.
"Later, those hands gave me up to someone else. The
next minute found me on the boat surrounded by my
parents and sister and brother. Their distress, concern, love
and affection completely engrossed me. After a while
someone raised a question about who had saved my life.
They looked everywhere for her. I looked around too; but

could not find that divine face anywhere. I had no answers
to the questions put to me. Finally, they decided that
Mother Cauvery herself must have rescued me. They
arranged to offer prayers to Goddess Cauvery every year on
that day.
"I was not satisfied. Goddess or human -- I wished to
see her again. Whenever I went by the river bank, I would
look around eagerly hoping for that Goddess to rise from
the waters once again. As I grew into boyhood, I knew that
she must have been a human being. Thus, whenever I had a
chance, in every festive crowd, I would eagerly examine
every old woman’s face. In the course of time, I realized
that it was not very civilized to stare at faces in that
fashion. As years passed, I lost all hopes of ever seeing her
again.
"About a year ago, I came here as Commander-in-chief
of our Southern Armies. Commander Bhoothi Vikrama had
already captured several regions of Lanka; Anuradhapura
had changed hands several times. It was under control of
Mahinda once again. Our men had laid siege of this fort.
During the siege, I wished to travel to various parts of
Lanka and personally know the land. The Commander sent
a detachment of hundred men to accompany me. I went to
all the places under our control; every nook and cranny, hill
and hillock, field and forest, river and lake was examined
by me. I slowly began to understand the nature of this land
and its population. You know that there are several smaller
islands along the coasts of this Lanka. I went to survey
those islands also. In the course of these travels, I and my
men had camped in a forest several leagues towards the
north of this fort. We were very close to a ford called
Elephant Crossing. The seas to the east and the seas to
the west of Lanka meet in the form of a very narrow
channel at this point. Elephant herds often crossed at this

ford while migrating to the northern parts. That it is why it
was named Elephant Crossing.
"A peculiar incident occurred while we were camped
at that spot. A wailing cry would be heard during nighttime
near that camp. We could not discern if that cry was a birdcall or a beast or human. An unfathomable sorrow was
mingled in that cry. The men on the outskirts of the camp
ignored this cry in the beginning. Later, the cry was heard
at other places, even within the camp. The men came to
report this to me. I ignored their fears, `Are you afraid of
ghosts and goblins? Then go back home and seek the safety
of your mother’s lap!’ They were roused by this statement
and became determined to find out the origin of the cries:
was it human, animal or spirit? One night, they crept upon
the figure raising that cry. When they approached, that
figure began to run away. It seemed to be a woman; but
they could never catch her. The cries never stopped -- it
was heard every night after that.
"I was not very concerned about it in the beginning.
My men talked about nothing but that; some of them were
really gripped by an unexplainable fear. I resolved to solve
the mystery once for all. The next night, I and a few men
began walking towards that cry. A woman emerged from
behind the bush. She looked at us for one second and
seemed to stand still with shock. She began running. If all
the men followed her, we would never be able to catch her.
I ordered the men to stop and followed her by myself. She
looked back and realized that I was alone; she waited as if
welcoming me. I became somewhat frightened and
hesitated. A few cautious steps brought me to her side.
Moonbeams showed her face clearly. She was smiling; she
was the divine Goddess Cauvery! She was the woman who
had saved me from the river. I stood staring at her divine
face!

"`Mother! Who are you? When did you come here?
Why? I have been looking for you all these years! If you
wished to meet me, you could have come to me directly.
Why do you stalk this camp? Why do you wail?’ I asked her
several questions in this fashion. That gracious lady never
said a word in reply. I repeated my questions with no avail.
Soon her eyes brimmed with tears that touched my heart.
She seemed eager to say something but could not utter the
words. Some incoherent sounds rose from her throat; I
understood: she was a deaf-mute.
I have never felt such sadness in my whole life the
likes of which enveloped me at that moment! I did not know
what to do. Suddenly, she hugged me and kissed me on my
forehead. Her tears fell on my head. In the next minute, she
let go of me and began running again. I did not try to follow
her. My men surrounded me in the camp with questions. I
soothed them, `She is neither ghost nor goblin; a mere
mortal woman. She is mentally deranged because of some
sadness in her life. Do not follow her or worry her if she
comes here again!’
"On the day after that I wondered many times if I
should break camp and move away from that place. But I
gave no orders. I had some lingering hope that she might
come again. Night came and I was not disappointed. We
heard wailing cries again and I followed her alone, ordering
my men to stay back. She waited with a welcoming smile
once again. She looked at me for a while, trying to say
something. I could not understand.
"She took my hand and led the way. I had no fear in
going with her. Her concern for me in clearing that forest
path and moving thorny bushes away from my limbs,
touched my heart. After a while we neared a simple hut in
the middle of that forest. An oil lamp cast a flickering light
in that cottage. An old man was lying down in that room. I
realized that he was very sick; he shivered as if with

unbearable cold. His whole body shook with delirious fever;
jaws were locked and eyes were bloodshot. He was
babbling something.....
"You might remember, that monk we saw in the
underground monastery tonight...? They said that the
divinities had descended upon him! He reminded me of that
old man who was shivering in that forest cottage. Actually, I
doubted if the divine Gods had taken hold of the monk or if
he was in the grip of a shivering fever. I did not voice my
doubts at that time... Why raise doubts about their belief
and faith? I gave permission to hold the Perahara Carnival
this year. Perhaps I made a big mistake. What will happen
to this ancient city that is barely surviving so many wars if
it is attacked by the shivering fever? All the remaining
people may be forced to evacuate!"
Prince Arulmozli seemed to be lost in thought. Vandiya
Devan waited for a while and then asked impatiently, "Sir!
Why worry about this city? What happened in that cottage?
Tell us please..."
"Nothing happened in that cottage. Perhaps my
Godmother did not wish me to remain there for a long time.
She took my hand and dragged me out very soon. Making
various signs, she conveyed her thoughts to me. `Do not
tarry in these areas for a long time. If you stay here, this
shivering fever is likely to grip you too. Strike camp and
move away quickly.’ I somehow understood her. I also
realized that she had warned me in this fashion because of
the love she bore towards me. I took her signs as a warning
form the Gods and moved camp that very night. My men
were very happy about that; they did not have to hear that
horrible wailing anymore...."
(Note: The fever being referred to in this story is likely
to be malaria which is endemic to the area. The cause of
malaria -- parasite infection spread by mosquitos -- was not

understood till recent years. The fever was believed to be
contagious and caused by naturally occurring poison gasses
or by spirits. Accompanied by chills, shivering, body ache
and delirium, it was often fatal.)
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 38 -- Eloquent Pictures

Prince Arulmozli stopped his
story suddenly and asked, "Did you
hear any footsteps?"
Both friends who had been
engrossed in the story replied that
they had not heard anything.
Azlvar-adiyan who was sitting on
the floor said after a little
hesitation, "This place seems
warmer than before."
"I think I smell some smoke,"
said Vandiya Devan.
"I hope this place is quite safe?"
Azlvar-adiyan voiced his concern.
"Mother Cauvery will come and
surely warn us if there is any
danger.
Don’t
worry,"
replied
Arulmozli as he continued with the
story.

"We broke camp and left that
place very quickly. Even then, ten
of our men were struck by that
shivering fever. Oh! It is a horrible
sickness that turns even the
bravest man into a coward. Men
who face battles and bear warwounds gladly will loose courage in
three days after the fever strikes,
blabbering `let me go home!’ I felt
that Goddess Durga, the patroness
of our clan must have appeared in
the form of that old woman and
warned us in time. Anyway, she did
not forsake me even after that. She
followed me to every place I went.
She saved me from several dangers
-- mountain pythons, forest beasts,
hidden enemies. She would vanish
with the same suddenness with
which she would appear. Within a
few days I learned the art of

conversing with her by signs and
facial expressions. My mind was
soon able to discern the thoughts of
her heart. Moreover, I was soon
capable of sensing her presence
near me even if she was not visible.
Even now... Good, why don’t you
both go back to your beds and
pretend sleep? Quick!"
They quickly sought their beds and closed their eyes in
pretended sleep. A figure appeared by the moonlit window.
She was the same woman who had beckoned from across
the street when the mansion had crumbled. A soft hissing
sound came from her. Arulmozli got up to stand beside that
window. The woman made some signs and the Prince
pointed to his two friends sleeping on their beds. She
replied in more sign language.
Prince Arulmozli ordered his friends to quickly follow
him as he jumped out of the window, to run across the
terrace. Soon they were out of that wooden palace,
following that old woman silently. After following a tree
enclosed trail for some time, they suddenly emerged into a
moonlit clearing to be met by an astonishing sight. Several
large, dark elephants stood in formation guarding a huge
sepulcher and spire in their midst. Vandiya Devan’s heart
skipped a beat when he saw them. The woman did not
hesitate even for one second as she walked towards that
elephant herd. "Did you see? Those elephants look so real!"
Azlvar-adiyan’s whisper replaced shock with amazement.

The sculpture elephants stood close, touching each
other; their backs supported the weight of a large domed
sepulcher and spire fashioned after the style of Buddhist
shrines. Each huge elephant had two long curving tusks.
One among those several elephants had lost one of its
tusks! She went up to that elephant and moved a large
boulder by its feet. Steps appeared in the newly revealed
pit; she went down followed by the others. After the steps,
a short narrow path and soon into a large vaulted pavilion.
Two large, clay lamps cast some light in that chamber.
She trimmed the oil-wick and picked up one of those
lamps as she indicated that the Prince alone should follow
her. The other two were a bit concerned about this; but
their worries were calmed when they realized that she was
merely interested in showing the Prince some pictures
drawn on the walls of that chamber. The pictures on those
walls seemed to be a series depicting incidents in some
story. They were drawn in a style similar to temple frescoes
that depict stories of Lord Buddha’s life and incarnations.
The face of the young girl who was the main character in
those pictures resembled the old woman who was holding
the oil lamp. Prince Arulmozli easily understood that she
had drawn the story of her life in those pictures.
The drawings showed a young girl standing on the
beaches of an island. A man, her father was riding the
waves on a catamaran, fishing the deep seas. Next, the girl
was walking down a trail; a young man was sitting on a
tree; he seemed to be a prince, because of the diadem on
his head. A bear tried to climb the tree as the prince looked
away. The girl screamed and ran. The bear was now
chasing her. The prince jumped down and threw his knife at
the bear. Bear and man began wrestling as the girl leaned
on a coconut palm and watched. Finally, the bear fell and
the Prince came up to the girl to thank her. She merely
shed tears in reply. The fisherman who was her father came

to explain that she was deaf and mute. The Prince was
saddened but he made friends with her. Hand in hand they
wandered through the forests of the island. He made a
garland of flowers and placed it around her shoulders.
A large sailing ship was anchored near that island.
Some men came down to greet the Prince. They insisted
that he should go back on the ship. The Prince consoled her
and said good bye. He sailed away on that big ship leaving
her unhappy and tearful. Her father sensed her sadness
and placed her on a boat to take her across the sea. They
reached a place with a lighthouse. A family near that
lighthouse welcomed father and daughter. Later, they all
sat in a bullock cart and journeyed over a long road to
reach a large city surrounded by a big fort. In that city the
Prince stood on a palace balcony wearing a jeweled crown.
Richly dressed noblemen and women stood around him.
The girl who saw him like this lost her senses. She ran and
ran to soon reach the sea-shore. She climbed the lighthouse
tower and jumped into a turbulent sea. The waves cradled
her and a man pulled her up into his boat. He thought that
she was possessed by ghosts and took her to a priest who
could exorcise her. The temple priest tried to cure her with
neem leaves and holy ashes.
One day a queen came to worship at that temple. The
priest spoke to the queen about that mentally unsound girl.
The queen was pregnant and she recognized that just like
her, the girl was also expecting a child. She placed the poor
Karaiyar girl in her palanquin and took her to the palace.
The poor girl lived in the palace garden and was soon
delivered of twin babies. The Queen came and asked for
one of the babies for herself. The poor girl refused. But
later she reconsidered and decided that both babies would
be better off if they grew up in the palace. She left both
babies and went away at midnight without telling anyone.

For many years she wandered in the forests. Whenever
she felt the urge to see her children, she would wander
back into the city. She would stand on the river bank,
hiding behind the trees to gaze at the King and his family -his children. Once a child accidentally fell into the river.
She saved that child before vanishing into the forest.
All these incidents were depicted very realistically by
simple ocher-stick drawings on that wall. Prince Arulmozli
had been looking at those pictures with avid interest and
astonishment. On reaching the last picture, he signaled and
said, "The baby saved from the river was me; you saved
me!" The woman embraced Arulmozli and kissed his
forehead.
She led him to the farther wall in that pavilion. The
pictures on this wall were not about incidents in her life.
They depicted various dangers and accidents that might
befall the Prince. She warned him with eloquent signs
about those dangers.
Vandiya Devan and Azlvar-adiyan watched all this even
as they stood by one corner in that pavilion. Vandiya Devan
compared the woman’s face with Lady Nandini’s and
wondered about it in many ways. Realizing that it was not
the appropriate time, he refrained from voicing his doubts.
They emerged from the secret chamber guarded by
stone elephants. The woman led them up some steps that
climbed to the top of the spire. The three men were
astonished by her strength and lack of tiredness. Half way
up the tower, Vandiya Devan was tired; but he continued
without comment. Finally, upon reaching a walled ledge,
they looked around. In the distance, in the middle of the
city, they could see a fire burning brightly.
"Oh! Look at Emperor Maha Sena’s palace going up in
flames!" remarked Prince Arulmozli.
"Is that the place where we were sleeping?"

"Yes."
"Oh! If we had fallen asleep?!"
"Perhaps we would have been fodder to the Lord of
Fires!"
"How can you identify from this distance that it is the
palace where we were sleeping?"
"The pictures in the chamber spoke to me."
"I did not hear them."
"I am not surprised. Pictures speak in a unique but
eloquent language. Only those who know that language can
understand."
"What else did the pictures say?"
"They spoke of some family secrets of my clan. They
warned me to go away from this Lanka island immediately."
"Long live the eloquence of those pictures! Mr. Nambi,
my suit has won." Vandiya Devan was jubilant.
"Sir! the pictures did not stop at that. Did they not
warn that as long as you remain in this island, you should
not sleep under a roof, tarry under a tree or walk anywhere
but in the middle of the street?" asked Azlvar-adiyan.
"You are correct. How did you know?" asked Arulmozli.
"You know the language of pictures; I am proficient in
sign-language. When your Gaurdian-mother was speaking
to you, I was watching her," said Azlvar-adiyan.
"Great! There is very little left of this night. Let us rest
for a while at least, on this terrace atop this spire. We shall
leave after daybreak," said the Prince.
The sharp rays of the warm sun woke up Vandiya
Devan from a deep sleep. Apart from the real incidents of
the previous night, all kinds of conspirators, arsonists, deafmutes, ghosts, goblins, bears, monks, crowns and other

confusions had plagued his dreams. All dreams faded in the
bright sun-light. Confusion and fear flew away.
He realized that Azlvar-adiyan and the Prince had
risen early and were ready. He rose quickly and readied
himself in a hurry. They came down from the tower and
walked down the middle of several streets. Soon, they
reached the Mahameha Gardens in the middle of
Anuradhapura. An ancient, thousand-and-five-hundredyear-old, holy ficus tree was in that garden. Monks and
householders of the faith were going around the tree in
circles and worshipping it with fragrant flowers.
Prince Arulmozli bowed in prayer before that sacred
tree. "Princes and their kingdoms will vanish in the course
of time. But this tree remains witness that order and
sanctity will prevail forever," he said as he looked around
here and there. Towards one corner stood three horses in
readiness for a journey. Three men stood holding the three
horses.
When the Prince approached them, the men bowed in
happy recognition. The Prince spoke to them and beckoned
Vandiya Devan, "It was the same Maha Sena’s palace where
we were sleeping, which burned down last night. These
men were worried that we might have been burned in that
fire. They are overjoyed to see us!"
Vandiya Devan replied, "It is true that this ancient tree
is still alive; but law and order is long dead!"
"Don’t you dare say that! How can law collapse as long
as I am alive?" intervened Azlvar-adiyan. They mounted
those horses and left Anuradhapura by the northern gates.
The carnival crowd was still busy in all the streets and
gates, so none noticed them.
They soon reached the small town called Mahindala
about a league and a half to the north-east of
Anuradhapura. "Emperor Ashoka’s son, Prince Mahinda

gave his first sermon about the Buddhist faith in this town
after he came to Lanka. What a fortunate prince he was!
He did not venture with armies and swords to conquer new
lands. He did not have to hide and wander from assassins."
"Poor chap! That was his misfortune!" joked Vandiya
Devan.
"You should never part from me, Sir! With you beside
me, even the biggest danger seems petty," said Prince
Arulmozli with a laugh.
"And the best of times is likely to turn dangerous!"
quipped Azlvar-adiyan.
They were slowly riding along the Royal Way, when
they glimpsed a dust cloud in the distance and heard the
hoofbeat of several horses galloping towards them. Soon,
they could discern a small cavalry riding towards them. The
spears held by the horsemen shone brilliantly in that early
morning sun. Vandiya Devan warned, "Sir! Draw your
sword from its scabbard!"
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 39 -- Here is War!
As soon as Vandiya Devan demanded that he draw his
sword, Prince Arulmozli declared, "Here, I have drawn it,"
as he drew his great sword from its scabbard. Vandiya
Devan had already drawn his own sword. They were huge
great-swords of immense length and weight. The soldiers
who had delivered the horses in Anuradhapura’s
Mahameha Gardens had also given these swords.
The Prince jumped off his horse, "Get thee down! You!
I cannot tolerate your highhandedness any more. Let me
decide once for all!" Vandiya Devan was shocked by these
harsh words. He was not sure if it was jest or jeopardy!
But he dismounted because the Prince was already on the
ground.
"Why do you hesitate Sir? Last night, you tried to
insult me by saying that my forefathers came to wait in the
forecourts of your grandfather! You said my folks were
jealous of the bards who carried away their canopies and
horses. I cannot tolerate such comments. I must decide
once for all before we go any further!" With such words the
Prince began to swirl the great-sword with both his hands,
as he approached Vandiya Devan.
Yes; it was no ordinary sword. Even the strongest of
men need two hands to merely lift those great-swords. Only
by holding the hilt with both their hands could anyone swirl
or fence with those weapons. The Prince did not appear like
a delicate flower nurtured in the comforts of palaces as he
lifted and swirled that sword -- he was like Arjuna, Bhima,
Aravaan and Abhimanyu, the great heroes of ancient times.
He appeared lofty and noble like a true descendent of those
famous Chozlas, Vijayala of the many battle-wounds,
Rajaaditya who died on a war-elephant.

Vandiya Devan also lifted his great-sword with both his
hands and began to swirl it. He began with some hesitation
and confusion, but soon grew steadier. The spirit of a true
warrior made him forget that the enemy was the Prince he
revered. He stopped wondering about the purpose of this
duel. Only the great-sword swirling in his opponent’s hands
remained in his eyes. All his thoughts were concentrated on
defending himself from that sword and on somehow
dislodging the sword from the enemy by wounding him.
The tempo of the clanging swords began in a slow beat
rising to a faster and faster crescendo. Azlvar-adiyan could
not understand the behavior of Prince Arulmozli for some
time.
There must be some purpose to this performance.
Perhaps it is a device to stop those who are coming down
the road in order to discern their intention before acting
accordingly.
Therefore, he led their horses to block the road and
waited by their side holding the reins.
The horse-men on the road came nearer. Azlvaradiyan’s concern was cleared by seeing the tiger-flag flying
in their midst. They are our men; but who could it be? The
heralds riding ahead answered this by their thundering
proclamations:
"The Commander of the Lankan Forces who
vanquished Mahinda in Lankan-campaigns; he who took
Veera-pandiya’s head during the Battle of Vaigai, Lord Velir
of Kodumbalur, noble Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari arrives!
Make way! Make way!"
"The scion of the royal Pallava House, bravest among
the braves who took Veera-pandiya in the Battle of Vaigai,
he who demolished the Vengi forces during the battle of
North Pennar, heroic Lord Parthiban Pallava arrives. Make
way! Make way!"

About thirty horse-men followed these heralds. In their
midst, Commander Bhoothi Vikrama and Parthiban Pallava
rode with dignity on two beautiful white horses. An
elephant with a saddle on top, walked ponderously behind
the cavalry. In the dust cloud at some distance, one could
faintly discern a contingent of footmen. The horse-men
seemed annoyed by the impediment on the road. "Who is
that?" "Move!" "Make way!" rose some voices. Soon, soft
whispering and exclamations of surprise and amazement
went back and forth among them as they came to a slow
stop. The soldiers jumped down from their horses and
began to form a circle as they stood watching the sword
fight on the road. Commander Bhoothi Vikrama and
Parthiban also dismounted to come and stand in front of
their men. Parthiban seemed quite provoked as he
commented to the Commander, "Do you see this? Don’t you
see that my remarks about the Vallam fellow are true?
Utter impertinence! Displaying his foolishness to the
Prince! How can we tolerate this quietly?" He was
beginning to draw his own sword.
Bhoothi Vikrama held his hand and stopped him. "Be
patient, Sir! Let us watch. What beautiful swordplay! It is a
long time since we saw anything like this!"
The footmen who had been following, about three
hundred men, had come close. They enlarged the circle of
men and began to watch with interest. By now, a girl
dismounted from the saddle on top of the elephant. She
parted a way through the horses and footmen and came to
stand in front of the watching circle. It is quite impossible
to describe the shock and agitation that filled her face.
When the swords flashed hither and thither, her eyes
flashed in step with them. When the two men jumped and
leaped in the course of the duel, unaware to herself her
waist swayed and feet danced. In a while she plucked a
long-stemmed blue-lily that had been decorating her coiled

tresses and began swirling its stem in her hands. The
flower in her hand danced to the tune raised by the
clanging great-swords. We do not have to reveal the
identity of this girl to our readers! She was none other than
Poonkuzlali! Surely, we have not forgotten!
The swordsmen fought for a while with the Prince
taking a stance facing her. Slowly inch by inch they moved
in a circle as they stepped this way and that. After a while
Vandiya Devan was in a position facing Poonkuzlali. During
the fight, with quick glances, Vandiya Devan’s eyes had
taken in the growing crowd of men. They caught sight of
Poonkuzlali! He lost his concentration for one small second
in the surprise of seeing her. That one second was enough
for Prince Arulmozli. The Prince’s sword fell upon Vandiya
Devan’s sword with a force like the heavenly thunderbolt!
The brave Vaanar youth stumbled; his sword slipped from
his hands and fell to the ground.
The cheer raised by the surrounding men was like a
roaring ocean. Even their loud shouts were drowned by the
peeling laughter that broke loose from the young maiden.
Vandiya Devan tried to pick up his sword when the Prince
ran up to him and heartily embraced him.
"You did not lose to my skillful sword. You fought
equally to meet every thrust and parry. But you lost to the
swordplay of a maiden’s eyes! There is nothing to be
ashamed about that! It can happen to anyone."
Vandiya Devan tried to reply when Commander
Bhoothi Vikrama and Parthiban came closer.
"My Lord! I had sent this youth to you. I hope he has
not misbehaved. I was somewhat anxious!" said the
Commander.
"Yes Sir! I could not tolerate his constant nagging,
`You said that there was a war in Lanka! Where is the War?
Where is the battle?’ I showed him, `Here is war!’" The

soldiers set up an even louder cheer on hearing these
words of their beloved Prince.
The Commander came to fondly place a hand on
Vandiya Devan’s shoulder as he said, "Son, it is a long time
since I saw such a fantastic sword-fight. You are truly a
good companion to this Prince. He often gets these sudden
urges to tussle. Is he not a descendent of Emperor
Paranthaka who bore the title King of Wrestlers? Those
who cannot keep up with his duels cannot remain his
longtime friends."
The Prince was beside Parthiban, "Sir, I knew that you
had come here in search of me. I was hurrying to meet you.
Is my brother well at Kanchi? How is grandfather?"
"Your brother and grandfather have sent important
messages for you. I have wasted more than four days in
search of you after arriving in Lanka. There is no point in
further delay..." even before Parthiban could finish,
Arulmozli interrupted him.
"You would not have come personally if it had not been
important. Let us not waste time; give me the message."
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama turned towards them,
"We cannot discuss anything in the middle of a road amidst
all these people. There, I can see a pavilion; let us go there.
Fortunately, there is no dearth of rest-pavilions, ruined or
not, in this Lanka."
They moved towards that slightly ruined rest-pavilion
situated a little away from the road.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 40 -- Deliberation
Vandiya Devan was walking beside Azlvar-adiyan and
saying, "What is this with the Prince? He started a sudden
fist-fight on the other day; and now a sword-duel. At least
he could have given some warning! This friendship with the
Prince seems to be quite dangerous."
Arulmozli heard these words as he joined them, "Yes
Sir, friendship with me is very dangerous. You should have
realized it last night itself. If you wish to avoid danger, you
should be at least ten leagues away from my presence!"
"My Lord, I did not mean that! I am ready to face any
danger by your side, for your cause. But if these sudden... "
Azlvar-adiyan interrupted, "Could you not understand
that Thambi? The Prince used a ruse to identify the
approaching men before deciding how to deal with them.
Any newcomer would stop and watch a sword-fight in
progress."
Prince Arulmozli said, "Thirumalai speaks the truth.
But there is something curious about my personality: any
friend of mine is sure to earn the jealousy and enmity of
others. To prevent that, I often pick quarrels with those I
choose to be my friends. Only those who do not mind this
behavior can remain close to me."
"That’s fine with me! From now, I shall not wait for
you; I’ll begin the duels myself! My Lord, I brought several
messages for you; but I forgot one important missive. I
have to give you that message immediately. If you do not
wish to listen, please draw your great-sword once again!"
"I am sure that is not necessary! What is the message?
I’ll hear it."
"There was a girl with a blue lily in her hands,
standing in that crowd of men surrounding us. You even

mentioned that I had lost to the swordplay of her eyes. Do
you know her?"
"No. I did not see her very well. Neither is it my habit
to do so."
"Sir, she had sent a message for you. I did not have an
opportunity to tell you because, from the moment I met
you, we have been busy with wrestling matches and
escaping from crumbling mansions. Therefore, I could not
deliver her message. When I saw her suddenly, I
remembered that I had not conveyed her message and I
lost my guard; you knocked my sword down," said Vandiya
Devan.
"That is all right. Anyway, who is that girl? Why should
she send me messages?"
"Sir, she is Poonkuzlali."
"Beautiful name! I have not heard it before."
"Sir, do you remember the name Ocean Princess?"
"Ocean Princess -- Ocean Princess! I do not remember
it; I do not recall ever having met her."
"Please remember it Sir! If you do not recall her name,
hear heart will break! You were about to get into your boat
to board your ship at Kodi Karai. At that time, a lone girl
rowed her boat and came ashore on the beach. You
watched her with amazement. She came towards you with
a curiosity to find out who you were; you asked the
Lighthouse Keeper beside you, `Who is this maid?’ He
replied, `She is my daughter.’ And you said, `Is that so? I
thought that she was the Sea King’s daughter -- The Ocean
Princess!’ She has not forgotten your words. I could come
to Lanka only because of her help."
"Now that you mention it, I remember that incident
vaguely. But what is the Ocean Princess of Kodi Karai doing

here at Anuradhapura? Why is she with these men?
Perhaps she has come in search of you?"
"No. That is not possible. She has no reason to look for
me. If she has come here in search of someone, it must be
in search of you. I have no idea why!" As he said these
words, Vandiya Devan turned back to look at Poonkuzlali
who was walking besides the Commander. He realized that
all her attention was concentrated on the Prince, though
she walked with her head bent and eyes cast downward.
Every now and then her glance skipped towards Prince
Arulmozli. She must be aware that they were talking about
her... otherwise she has no reason to walk so bashfully;
otherwise, that vivacious girl’s eyes would wander hither
and thither restlessly.
They reached a roofless pavilion whose carved granite
pillars stood intact. A few tall trees growing around it gave
some shade to that raised pavilion. It had a stone bench of
sorts in the middle. Prince Arulmozli, Commander Bhoothi
Vikrama and Lord Parthiban went to sit on this seat.
Vandiya Devan and Azlvar-adiyan stood by their side.
Poonkuzlali went to stand on the other side, hiding in the
shadows of a pillar. From that spot she could see the Prince
and Vandiya Devan clearly. The men surrounded that
roofless pavilion and stood in a formation of double rows.
The elephant and the horses stood beyond them. Arulmozli
looked at Parthiban and said, "What is the message from
my brother and my grandfather? I am eager to hear it."
"Prince, the Chozla Empire is in great danger; you
must be aware of it..."
"Yes Sir! The Emperor has been sick for a long time."
"That is not the only risk. Grave peril threatens the
Empire. Officers holding important positions have turned
traitors. They have begun conspiracies against the
Emperor, the Crown Prince and you. They have resolved

that the crown is not for your brother but it is for that
Madurandaka who masquerades as a devout Saiva dressed
in false holy beads. The two Lords of Pazluvoor, Lord
Sambuvaraya and his son Kandamaran, Lord Raajali of the
double canopy, Lord Mazlava-raya of Mazluvoor and some
others like them belong to the core group of conspirators.
But we need not be unduly concerned about their efforts.
The Northern Army and the Southern Army are both under
our control. Lord Malayaman of Thiru-kovalur and Lord
Velir of Kodumbalur are on our side. The conspiracy of
enemies can be rendered useless within minutes with the
help of our allies and our armies. But it is not politic to give
the enemies too much time. The treachery should be
destroyed before it takes root. Your grandfather and your
brother have sent me here to escort you back to Kanchi
immediately because such a situation has arisen. Your
grandfather feels that it is not appropriate for you two
brothers to be away from each other at such times; he
thinks it is important that you should be together. In
addition, let me inform you about the heartfelt wishes of
your brother. He has no interest to remain in one place or
to rule kingdoms. He is eager to sail across the seas to
distant shores and establish the Tiger-flag in those lands
after conquering them. His war-fever has grown ten-fold
since Lord Pazluvoor had placed obstacles to his northern
campaigns. Therefore, once you arrive in Kanchi, after
marching to Tanjavur and destroying all those vile
conspirators and traitors, after placing you on the Chozla
throne and crowning you, ...."
Prince Arulmozli had been listening to this long
message with interest and reverence. Upon hearing the last
few words of Parthiban, he covered his ears with his hands
and said, "No! Do not utter such alarming words. The
Chozla throne and I are far apart."

"I shall not speak of it if you do not like it. It is your
brother’s will and your wish. It is something to be decided
between you two brothers. But it is important that you are
together in the matter of destroying the traitors. You must
come to Kanchi immediately. Let us destroy the very roots
of the Pazluvoor and Sambuvaraya clans. Let us send
Madurandaka the Saiva devotee to the Saiva heavens. After
that you and your brother can think about it and do as you
wish," said Parthiban Pallava.
"Sir, how can we decide everything? My father -- the
Emperor -- Should we not consult his opinion? Perhaps you
know that too? Did my brother get any confidential
message from my father?"
"Prince, it is important that I speak the truth at this
time. There is no use in hiding things. It is impossible to
learn your father’s wishes at this time. The Emperor is no
longer free. He is Lord Pazluvoor’s prisoner. None can meet
the Emperor without that Lord’s permission; none can
speak to the Emperor. How can we consult his opinion?
Your brother made endless efforts to bring your father to
Kanchi. He sent an invitation saying the Emperor should
inaugurate the newly built Golden Palace at Kanchi. There
has been no reply from the Emperor."
"Everyone knows that my father is not in good health
and that he is immobile."
"My Lord, your father is the Emperor of the land; does
he have to walk to Kanchi? Does he not have elephants and
horses? Are there no carriages and carts? Chariots and
palanquins? Thousands of crowned nobility will come
forward to carry your father physically to Kanchi. That is no
excuse. It is the treachery of the Pazluvoor fellows;
Tanjavur palace is now a prison fortress. Prince if you wish
to save your father’s life you should come away
immediately to Kanchi."

It was obvious that these words distressed Arulmozli.
For the first time, there were signs of worry on his
charismatic face. He was lost in thought for some time
before he turned towards the Commander.
"Commander, what is your suggestion? Prime Minister
Anirudda Brahma-raya who is a confidant and personal
friend of my father had been here some days ago. He
suggested that I should remain in Lanka for some time, and
you endorsed the idea. You somehow persuaded me even
when I asked, `There is no war here, why should I remain?’
The Prime Minister has reiterated the same message
through this Mr. Nambi, his messenger. You know the
regard I have for my sister Younger Pirati; I will not cross
the line drawn by her. I came to Lanka because of her
advice. She has sent a letter through this Vaanar nobleman.
In a way, my sister’s letter confirms Lord Parthiban’s
message. But she has written that I should immediately go
back to Pazlayarai. My brother has sent word through this
gentleman that I should come to Kanchi. What do you think
Commander?"
"Prince, till this morning I was of the opinion that you
should remain in Lanka. In fact, I argued with Lord
Parthiban for a long time, last night. In spite of the long
discussion, I did not agree with him. But this morning, that
girl who stands there brought some news. On hearing that,
I changed my conviction. I now think that you should return
to Kanchi as soon as possible." Thus spoke the Commander
of Lanka.
Prince Arulmozli now turned his eyes upon Poonkuzlali
who was ogling him from behind the pillar. "I have read
that Abimanyu was killed by enemies who attacked
simultaneously from all directions. It appears that news
from all directions will drown me. What news has that girl
brought?" he asked.

"Let her
Commander.

say

it

herself,"

said

Lord

Velir

the

Poonkuzlali walked up with hesitant steps to stand
before the Prince. Her glance swept all four directions; she
stared at the Commander and at Parthiban. She even
looked towards Vandiya Devan and Azlvar-adiyan who stood
on the other side. But she was unable to look up and speak
to the Prince.
"Woman, speak! Quickly!" ordered the Commander.
Poonkuzlali tried to say something, but she could not
form the words.
"Aha! The whole world seems to have gone mute!"
exclaimed Arulmozli. That was enough: Poonkuzlali looked
up to stare at Arulmozli’s face for the fraction of a second.
By then, her eyes were brimming with tears; she turned
away to run into the nearby grove of trees. Every one was
looking at this with some surprise!
Vandiya Devan stepped forward to say, "Sir, she has
run away like this before; I followed and caught up with
her. If permitted, I can go and bring her back."
"Do that. Meanwhile, let the Commander reveal the
news she had brought," said Prince Arulmozli.
"My Lord, the news can be given in two statements!
The Lords of Pazluvoor have sent two large ships filled with
soldiers to arrest you and take you back. Those ships have
come up the mouth of River Thondai and are anchored in a
hidden spot!" announced the Commander.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 41 -- "Look Over There"
On hearing the words spoken by Commander Bhoothi
Vikrama, Prince Arulmozli smiled. He mumbled to himself,
"Finally there appears a solution to the turmoil in my
mind."
Lord Parthiban had risen fuming with anger, "What are
you saying Commander? Is this true? Why have you not
mentioned this to me till this time? Now, I understand why
you dragged this foolish girl with us. I ask you once again -Is it true that the nobles of Pazluvoor have sent ships to
arrest the Prince?"
"Yes Sir! If this girl’s claims of seeing and hearing it
personally are to be believed, it is true."
"Oh! The words of Old Man Malayaman are indeed
true. He is the only one who truly understands the
Pazluvoor clansmen. Commander, why do you keep quiet
even after hearing this awful news? Has it come to such a
pass that those petty nobles of Pazluvoor are able to send
men to arrest this beloved Prince, -- this scion of Emperor
Paranthaka, beloved son of Emperor Sundara Chozla, this
prince revered by all the country and nation, beloved of all
the Tamil lands, Crown Prince Aditya Karikala’s blood
brother -- this Arulmozli Varma to be taken prisoner? Why
deliberate? Let us go with the army to destroy those who
came to arrest the Prince, bury them in this island itself!
We can then fulfil our plans; let us go -- why hesitate?"
Parthiban could not control his emotions.
The Commander looked at him, "Parthiba, I knew that
you would become agitated in this fashion; that is why I did
not tell you this information brought by the Karaiyar girl.
We have to think carefully before we act; there is no point
in haste."

"Think carefully! Think about what? Be careful about
what? Prince what do you say? Why do we have to
deliberate further? Even if you had any reservations till
now, there is no reason for delay anymore. We have to
destroy every rootstock of Pazluvoor."
Prince Arulmozli spoke very calmly, with no sign of
turmoil, "Let us know what the Commander thinks. Sir,
what is it that we have to consider carefully?"
"The men who have come to arrest you.... my tongue
hesitates to even utter these words.... but I have to speak
them. What can we do if the men have come to arrest you
upon orders of the Emperor? Can we oppose them even
then?"
Parthiban Pallava laughed loudly on hearing these
words, "Fantastic!! Your words!! Is the Emperor in any
position to give orders? Hasn’t Lord Pazluvoor imprisoned
him?"
Vandiya Devan spoke up at this point, "Lord Parthiban
speaks the complete truth. I saw it with mine own eyes: the
Lords of Pazluvoor keep the Emperor like a prisoner.
Without their permission, none can meet the Emperor;
none can talk to him. Because I dared to speak a few
words, the torment they put me through.... Oh, Good Lord!
I can still remember the iron grip of Lord Kalanthaka
Pazluvoor; my wrist is still painful!" with these words he
rubbed his wrists.
"Say it like that Vallavaraya! I misjudged you. Explain
it once more to the Prince and this Commander."
"No need. He has already spoken of everything he had
to say," said Arulmozli as he turned to Vandiya Devan, "Sir!
You mentioned that you would bring back that girl? Let us
hear the news she brought from her own lips. She seems
somewhat cranky -- soothe her down somehow and bring
her back."

"Yes, My Lord. I’ll bring her back. But I can never
tolerate you being arrested by Lord Pazluvoor’s men. It
shall never happen as long as I live." Vandiya Devan
stepped down from the pavilion.
"Commander, you have not spoken your opinion."
"This is my opinion: You should not meet the men sent
by Lord Pazluvoor. Board the ship brought by Parthiban and
go away to Kanchi immediately. I shall go to Tanjavur and
meet the Emperor personally and find out the real situation
there...."
"You going to Tanjavur is like thrusting your head in a
lion’s mouth! You can never return. You will disappear in
the underground dungeons. You will not be able to meet the
Emperor."
"What are you saying! Who in the Chozla lands is
powerful enough to throw me in prison? Which fellow dares
to prevent me from meeting the Emperor? Moreover, Prime
Minister Anirudda is in Tanjavur...."
"The Honorable Brahma-raya is indeed in Tanjavur. But
what is the use? Even he is unable to consult with the
Emperor. His man, this Mr. Nambi is here. Let us ask him."
The Commander turned towards Azlvar-adiyan, "Oh! I
forgot that this man is still here. Thirumalai, why are you
quiet? Like the Prince said, have you also become dumb?"
"Sir, the Lord God gave us two ears; only one mouth.
`Therefore, use your ears well; limit your speech!’ said my
master. He has told me to practice this policy particularly
when political affairs are being discussed."
"You follow your master’s orders very well. You can
talk now, because we ask you to do so. What do you think?"
"About what are you asking, Sir?"

"About this matter we have been discussing. What is
the right thing for the Prince? Should he remain in Lanka?
Or should he go to Kanchi City?"
"Can I speak what I truly believe? If the Prince
permits, I can say it."
Arulmozli, who had been lost in some thought looked
at Azlvar-adiyan Nambi, "Speak Mr. Thirumalai, speak
freely."
"We should find the strongest and safest prison in this
island and place the Prince inside it. We should post the
strongest available guard around it."
"What nonsense is this?!?" asked the Commander.
"Is this time for jest?" asked Parthiban Pallava.
"I am not babbling; nor am I joking. I spoke my mind.
Last night, the Prince was walking down the streets of
Anuradhapura -- the facade of a mansion came crumbling
down on him. Later, we were sleeping in one place; because
of some reason, we left that place and went away. Soon that
place went up in flames. Ask the Prince if all this is true."
They turned to look at the Prince, whose expression
confirmed Azlvar-adiyan’s words.
"Ask him who was the reason for all these accidents.
Do you think anyone would dare to burn down a mansion to
kill me or Vandiya Devan?"
Parthiban spoke anxiously, "Someone is trying to kill
the Prince! This confirms that he should go back with me to
Kanchi."
"Never, never! Rather than send the Prince with you,
we can hand him over to Lord Pazluvoor!" said Azlvaradiyan Thirumalai Nambi.
"You fellow! What did you say?!" Parthiban had begun
to draw his sword from his waist.

The Commander held him back, "Thirumalai, why do
you say this? Don’t you know that Lord Parthiban Pallava is
a true friend of the Chozla clan?"
"I am aware of that Sir; I am truly aware of it. But
mere friendship will not suffice."
"Lord Parthiban will give up his life for this friendship.
I know it Thirumalai."
"Maybe so. But let me ask a question; let him answer
that. Day before yesterday, when we were near Dampallae,
we saw two men in his company. Ask him about those two
men. Who were they? Where are they now? Ask him!"
Parthiban was somewhat shocked. He replied a little
hesitantly, "I met them near Tricone Hill. They promised to
guide me to the Prince. They disappeared suddenly in
Anuradhapura. Why do you ask Nambi? Do you know
anything about them?"
"I know. I know that they are two of the gang that has
sworn to destroy the very roots of the Chozlas. I suspect
that they tried to kill Prince Arulmozli in Anuradhapura last
night. Look over there!" Azlvar-adiyan pointed towards a
grove of trees.
He pointed to a spot away from the pavilion; amidst
the thick growth of trees stood a pretty maiden and a
youth. They were Poonkuzlali and Vandiya Devan. As they
spoke to each other, Vandiya Devan swirled a dagger and
threw it. It fell into some bushes -- a sharp `screech’ arose.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 42 -- Poonkuzlali’s Dagger
Vandiya Devan who left that roofless pavilion in search
of Poonkuzlali found her leaning upon a tree in the grove.
She seemed to be sobbing softly. He called gently,
"Poonkuzlali."
She turned around, startled by the sound. "It’s you."
She turned her face away.
"Yes, it’s me. Why are you angry with me?"
"I am not angry with you."
"Then why this vexed look?"
"I don’t like any men-folk."
"Even the Prince?"
She turned to look at him with fire laden eyes, "Yes,
more than anyone else, I do not like him."
"What did he do?"
"He did not recognize me, did not look at me."
"He remembers you very well. `Oh, I do remember the
Ocean Princess’ he said, when I mentioned your name."
"You lie."
"Why don’t you ask him yourself?"
"If he remembered me, why didn’t he talk to me?"
"He spoke to you; you did not reply. You ran away."
"I didn’t mean that kind of speech. If you meet a
known person would you not say `hello’ and `how are you?’
-- you are telling lies. He did not even see me!"
"There is a reason for that Poonkuzlali."
"What is it?"
"These are difficult times for the Prince."

"Who said so?"
"All the astrologers say it. Kudanthai Astrologer
mentioned it."
"What did he say to you?"
"Problem after problem will pile upon the Prince for
some time. Even those by his side will be faced with
distress, said that astrologer. The Prince knows this. That is
why he does not want any friends by his side; he does not
want his misfortune tainting others."
"Why are you friends with him?"
"Didn’t you see? Sometime ago he was duelling with
me trying to send me away. Without rhyme or reason, he
picked a quarrel with me in the middle of the road and
started a sword-fight. We stopped fighting only because of
your arrival."
"So, you won’t leave his side even if he sends you
away?"
"Never, I shall never leave his company. I will share all
his misfortunes."
"Do you like him that much?"
"Yes; I like him a lot."
"Why do you like him?"
"I have no explanation. When I saw him, I somehow
liked him."
"Me too!" said Poonkuzlali. Immediately regretting this
frankness, she bit her lip.
"I know that you like the Prince. That is why I came
here to take you back to him. Come with me."
"I won’t come."
"If you don’t, I’ll take hold of you by force and drag
you to him."

"Beware of coming near me: look at this knife I have.
Beware!" Poonkuzlali showed him the dagger she had
hidden in her waistband.
"Stupid girl! Why are you trying to kill me? Is it
because I reminded the Prince about you?"
"You lie! You did not tell him anything about me!"
"Oh, forget it! You said that two ships have come to
arrest the Prince. Come and tell him about it before you get
lost!"
"I have told all the details to the Commander."
"The Prince wants to ask you personally about it."
"I become dumb in his presence."
"The Prince is very fond of mute-women!"
"Chee! How dare you tease me!" Poonkuzlali raised
her dagger.
"Does it mean that you won’t come?"
"No."
"Fine; I am going back," said Vandiya Devan as he took
a step away. He turned back suddenly, once again, plucked
the dagger from her hands, and threw it away with a swirl.
The dagger swirled and swirled far away to land on a
distant bush. A `screech’ rose from behind that bush. It
was not clear if that was a human voice or if it was bird or
beast.
Poonkuzlali who was about to pounce upon Vandiya
Devan angrily, now turned towards that bush with some
surprise. They looked at each other meaningfully and
walked quietly towards that spot. New blood was spilled on
the leaves and ground behind that bush. There was neither
man nor beast in that place. Neither was Poonkuzlali’s
dagger anywhere nearby.

"Look at this Poonkuzlali. Do you now realize the truth
in my words? Danger plagues the Prince from all sides. No
one can say, where or from which direction or when
misfortune will strike. I took that knife from you
unthinkingly and threw it; and because of that we found
that someone had been hiding here. Think for yourself -why should they be hiding here? Waiting for an opportunity
to kill the Prince! Do you remember telling me that two
men had come to Kodi Karai a day before me and that your
brother had taken them in his boat; you were suspicious of
them? Remember that? How can we his friends abandon
the Prince at such difficult times?" Vandiya Devan spoke
without stopping for breath.
"What can I do if he asks me to go away?"
"We should not leave even if he asks us to go away."
Poonkuzlali thought for some seconds, "Don’t we have
to find out who was hiding here?"
"That is an impossible task for us. Where can we look
for them in this forest? If we delay too much, the Prince
might become angry. They might abandon us here and go
away. Come with me quietly."
"Alright," agreed Poonkuzlali. Both walked towards the
pavilion where the others were seated.
At first, the people in the pavilion questioned them
about the incident with the dagger. "Why did you throw the
dagger? What was the screeching sound?"
"I thought that some beast -- a fox or a jackal -- was
hiding behind that bush. That is why I took her knife and
threw it there. There was nothing where we searched," said
Vandiya Devan.
"Then forget
Commander.

it.

Question

this

girl,"

said

the

Poonkuzlali had been staring at the Prince from the
minute she had come to the pavilion. Chee! How foolish!
Why is my heart beating so quickly? What is that choking
my throat? Why are tears filling my eyes? Stupid girl where
is all your pluck? Why is your heart, which does not fear
the wide ocean waves or thundering storm, fluttering like
this? Why do your eyes, which can look into the terrible
face of a tiger, cloud like this? Foolish girl, do you want to
be called cranky once again! Look at the Prince and answer
him clearly. What can he do to you? They say he is full of
mercy and kindness. what can he do to you an innocent
girl...?
"Ocean Princess! Do you remember me?" his voice
came to her from the depths of the deep sea.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 43 -- "I Am A Culprit"
"Ocean Princess do you remember me?" ....
What kind of a question is this Ponniyin Selva? Whom
are you asking, `Do you remember?’ Is it right to ask, `Do
you remember,’ after we have been together for eons of
eons? Or, have you forgotten? For how many days, how
many epochs you have come sailing in my boat, with me....
Have you forgotten the pleasure trips we took in my tiny
sail-boat across endless seas, across ceaseless whitewaves? When sudden storm clouds darkened all directions,
we were friends holding each others hands, standing
together for a long time -- have you forgotten? When the
frightening whirlwind blew, wave-mountains besieged my
boat raising us sky high for one moment and hurling us
down to the depths for another minute -- those days of
glorious turbulence, when we stood hand in hand,
victorious over the sea-lord’s fury, have you forgotten
them?
Once we went flying, racing across distant space; you
reached for the stars and plucked them to make ornaments
for my hair-braids, have you forgotten that? You brought
the full-moon to me saying, `look at your golden face in this
silver disc’, have you forgotten even that? Once you dived
into the deepest ocean; I stood by the shore filled with
disquiet; you rose with both hands filled with shining pearls
and coral beads to make a garland of sea-gems to place
around my neck. I cannot forget that, even if you do not
remember... Oh King, how can we forget those days when
blue-black waters lapped upon the shores of gentle lakes,
where flower laden boughs bent low to form bowers that
blocked away the midday sun, where upon emerald carpets
of grass we sat gazing into each other’s faces for months on
end.... How could that be forgotten? At that time,
thousands of koil’s sat upon those branches singing sweet

melody to the drone raised by a million bees that buzzed
around as countless butterflies danced in happiness.
All this cannot be forgotten easily, not for a thousand
births. You asked me, `Do you remember?’ How could you?
I remember, I remember very well.... That pathetic girl
ached to say all such words; but her coral red lips merely
mumbled, "I remember."
"Ah! You are able to open your mouth and speak,
Ocean Princess. There are several beautiful sculptures of
heavenly maidens on the pillars of several mansions in this
lovely Lanka. I was afraid that you were another such
sculpture. Fortunately, you are capable of speaking! Speak
some more, I am eager to hear your melodious voice. I
understand that you told several things to our Commander.
I believe you said that two large ships have come up the
estuary of River Thondai to anchor at a hidden spot and
those ships are filled with armed men. Is that true Ocean
Princess? Did you see those ships with your own eyes?"
asked Prince Arulmozli.
"Yes, My Lord, I saw them myself."
"Ah! I am able to hear you much better; my ears are
pleased. Good, when you saw the ships you rowed your
boat into the narrows. You wished to wait till the ships had
gone away, so you went to lie down in a secluded spot in
the forest. Some men from the ships came ashore to stop
near the place you were sleeping. They began talking; you
did not wish to overhear their talk, nonetheless, you could
hear them. Did you say all this to the Commander?"
"I told him exactly what happened."
"When you heard their talk, you wished to warn the
Commander about it immediately. You left as soon as the
men moved away, hurrying in search of the Commander.
How did you come Ocean Princess?"

"I came half way in my boat; then I walked through the
forest."
"Where did you intend going?"
"I left thinking that the Commander would be at
Mattotam. On the way I heard that he was at Mahindala. I
had quite a time trying to meet the Commander! All sorts of
men obstructing me!" Poonkuzlali turned to look at
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama; her eyes flashed lightning
like the thunder storms of summer.
"It is not easy to meet the Commander of Lanka. You
would be astonished if you hear of the travails endured by
my friend here when he tried to meet the Commander.
Anyway, it is good that you did not mind the obstacles, that
you were adamant in meeting the Commander and telling
him. Poonkuzlali, can you repeat what you told the
Commander? Once more, for me? You heard them from
behind the tree; what did those men speak about?"
"My King, my lips hesitate to speak of such things."
"Be kind to repeat it once again for my sake."
"They talked of having come here to arrest you and
take you back."
"Did they speak anything about on whose orders they
had come to do such a thing?"
"I could not believe it My Lord. It must be the
conspiracy of the Pazluvoor nobles, I think."
"You can express your thoughts later. Ocean Princess,
just tell me what they said."
"They said that it was on orders of the Emperor."
"Very Good! Did they attribute any reason for that?"
"They did. They said that you conspired with the
Buddhist monks of Lanka and tried to crown yourself as an

independent King of Lanka.... I was so angry that I wanted
to kill those villains who said such things."
"Good that you did not! Don’t you know that there
should be no obstacles to the Emperor’s messengers?
Anyway, do you remember if they spoke of any other
important thing?"
"They said that the Commander should not become
aware of their mission; if he comes to know he might try to
help you escape... They wanted to find out your
whereabouts and meet you personally to deliver the orders
and take you with them... That is what they said."
"Therefore, you left immediately in search of the
Commander! Marvelous! You have really helped me a lot
Ocean Princess. Can you wait a little aside? I need to
consult with these men about an important thing. But don’t
run away too far like before. Don’t force me to send the
Lord of Vallam after you once again."
She moved away to stand behind a pillar; but she
chose a spot from where she could gaze upon the Prince’s
face! Two fat bees drowned in the honey-pot, struggling for
breath. Slowly, they managed to come ashore and enjoy the
nectar. Poonkuzlali’s eyes were in such a comfortable
position now: they drank the nectar of the Prince’s
charismatic face. Her heart threw tantrums that could not
be controlled; it escaped to fill boundless space with
ecstasy.
Arulmozli turned to his Commander, "Sir, you are the
chieftain of a clan that is friendly with our family for
several generations; a close friend of my father; I regard
you with the same reverence I accord my father. You too
have treated me as your own son. Therefore, you should
now help me discharge my duty. Not raise obstacles."
Before the Commander could reply, Arulmozli turned
to Parthiban, "Sir, I have a request for you. You are a loyal

friend of my dear brother. I consider my brother’s directive
as divine edict. Thus, I am bound to honor your word. I beg
of you that you should not place any obstacles to my
fulfilling my duty."
The Commander and Parthiban Pallava looked at each
other with meaningful glances that expressed their mutual
anxiety.
The Commander looked at the Prince, "Sir, I do not
understand anything you say. I have spent the better part of
my life in battlefields. I am not familiar with the subtlety of
speech. You speak of fulfilling your duty: what does that
mean? How do you intend discharging this duty?" he asked.
"At this time I have one and only one duty. I have to
obey my father’s directive. My father has sent men with
orders to arrest me. Why should I let them wander in
search of me? I wish to go to them and give myself up. That
is my duty...."
"Never. It is impossible. As long as I have life in my
body, I cannot permit that. I will prevent it," said Parthiban.
The Commander said, "Do not get agitated; be
patient." He then said the following to the Prince.
"Sir, you spoke of your duty. I too have a duty. Please
listen to that. I am the last male left alive in the noble
house of the Kodumbalur Velir’s. All other men have died in
service to the Chozla Empire. Most died in battle. One day I
too hope to die in a similar fashion, who knows?... Please
listen to my thoughts with some patience. The Emperor
appointed you, who had been raised in the comforts of
palace life, as the Commander-in-Chief of the Southern
Armies last year. At that time he summoned me in privacy
and said, `Parting form my son is like parting from my own
life. Nevertheless, I cannot keep him closeted in palaces
because of my love for him. He has to leave the palace one
day; he has to earn fame as a brave warrior like his brother.

But if anything happens to endanger his life, that very
moment this life will part from my body. You are
responsible to guard him from every danger.’ The Emperor
gave me orders in this fashion. Will the same Emperor who
gave such orders last year, send commands to arrest you
now? What have you done to provoke such orders? Their
accusations about your conspiring to secure Lanka’s throne
is utter falsehood. How could anyone believe this slander?"
Arulmozli who had been listening patiently till now,
interrupted at this point.
"I do not know if anyone could believe it or not; but I
can believe it."
"What are you saying, Prince?"
"I am saying that it is indeed true that I am plotting to
secure Lanka’s throne."
Vandiya Devan came forward now, "What are you
saying Sir? Till a few moments ago you were swearing by
Truth and Law! Now you utter such utter untruths!
Commander, do not believe him. Last night, the
Congregation of Buddhist Chiefs of Monastaries offered
him Lanka’s throne and crown. He refused. I and this Mr.
Nambi here are witness to that."
Arulmozli smiled, "My Lord of Vallam, a question for
you... Are those who conspire likely to have witnesses to
their deeds? Perhaps I refused Lanka’s throne merely
because you both were present!"
Vandiya Devan was stunned; he had no answer to this.
The Prince continued, "My Lord of Vallam, if you have any
doubts, you may question Mr. Nambi. Ask him what was
Prime Minister Anirudda’s message to me. `Buddhist
Monastary Leaders will offer you Lanka’s throne; refuse to
accept in the presence of reliable witnesses.’ Ask him if this
was not the message sent to me."

On hearing these words, everyone in the pavilion was
startled completely. Prince Arulmozli continued talking to
the Commander, "Sir, listen to me. It is true that I coveted
Lanka’s throne. My sister fostered this desire in me,
`Thambi, you are born to rule kingdoms, you have the sign
of the Discus & Conch on your palms. There is no place for
you in Tamil lands; go to Lanka and capture that throne for
yourself!’ said the Younger Pirati several times. She
nurtured this desire in me. Therefore, I am a culprit. The
Emperor has reason in ordering my arrest."
"Just a minute, Prince. If such a thought existed in
your heart, it is the good fortune of this island. You are not
accountable for that! Neither is your sister responsible. It is
Emperor Sundara Chozla who is responsible. He has
spoken of that several times, even to me. He has often said
that he would like to see you placed on Lanka’s throne. It
was the Emperor who first introduced this idea in Lady
Kundavai’s mind. Your sister merely acquainted you with
your father’s wishes. So, you are no culprit...."
"Then why should I hesitate going to my father’s
presence? I shall explain the true state of affairs to him.
These two gentlemen can be my witnesses. After that, it is
my duty to follow whatever orders the Emperor may give."
Finally, Parthiban spoke with a rage filled voice,
"Commander we are wasting time in pointless chatter.
There is no use of hiding anything anymore. We have to
reveal the truth to the Prince. Are you going to tell him, or
shall I do so?"
"I will tell him; be patient," said the Commander.
Lowering his voice after looking around, he said, "Prince, I
did not wish to tarnish your unsullied mind, but that isn’t
working. I have to tell you about a distasteful affair. You are
aware that Lord Pazluvoor, in his old age, has married a
very young girl named Nandini. She is a sorceress, well

versed in frightening spells and magic. With the help of her
magic, she has enslaved the Elder Lord Pazluvoor. He obeys
every whim and fancy of her’s without question. It is ill fate
that has reduced that great and brave warrior born of an
ancient noble family, to such an unfortunate situation."
"Commander, this is nothing that I have not heard
before. Every town and country in Chozla territory is
talking about it."
"The magic of that sorceress Nandini wielded its
power merely on the nobles of Pazluvoor till recently.
Prince, forgive me -- her witchcraft is now influencing the
Emperor also. That is why he has given such orders -- these
commands to arrest you."
"Be careful Commander! Do not dare to malign the
name of my father the Emperor. As long as my father is
alive, every order he gives, whatever the circumstance in
which it was given, the order is divine law."
"We do not refute that. We are anxious because even
his life is in danger, not merely his freedom. Till yesterday
even I did not know the full truth about Nandini. Lord
Parthiban told me last night: it is important that you also
become aware of that frightening information."
The Commander continued, "The final battle against
Veera-pandiya was fought three years ago near Madurai
City. At that time, your brother Karikala, this Parthiban and
I would confer together about every plan before executing
action. Pandiya forces were completely destroyed. Like he
had done before, Veera-pandiya tried to escape into hiding
in the desert. The three of us were adamant that we should
not let that happen again; we were determined to capture
him somehow or other; in truth we had sworn oaths that we
would not return to Tanjavur without Veera-pandiya’s head.
So, we did not trust anyone else, but followed him
ourselves. Finally we learned that he was hiding in some

cottages near a temple. Your brother Karikala stopped us
away from the cottage and entered it by himself. He killed
Veera-pandiya and brought his head outside. We left, happy
that the task was done. But none of us were aware of a
farce that had been enacted inside that cottage. A girl who
had given sanctuary to Veera-pandiya tried to protect him,
begging for her lover’s life. Karikala kicked her away and
killed the enemy, cutting off his head and bringing it
outside. It was Nandini who tried to save the life of Veerapandiya the lifelong enemy of Chozlas. Later, she appears
in Tanjavur, wedded to a seventy-year-old man and titled
the Young-Queen of Pazluvoor! We should be able to guess
why, with what intention she must have come. She has
come to revenge Veera-pandiya’s death. She has come to
completely destroy the Chozlas.
"It is not easy for anyone who goes near her, to escape
her enchanting coils. Vandiya Devan can witness the truth
of this. Mr Nambi can bear witness to the existence of a
frightening gang that has sworn to kill every rootstock of
Chozla nobility. It is Nandini who finances that gang.
Prince, unfortunately, our beloved Emperor is also
enmeshed in her witchery. The Emperor is now considering
Madurandaka for the throne. Therefore, it is not advisable
for you to go to Tanjavur, thinking it to be your father’s
orders...."
"Commander, I am surprised by all that you say. But it
further confirms my decision. When such frightening
problems surround my father, it is my duty to be by his
side. Why do I need Lanka or its throne? Why should I be
concerned about my life? There is no need for further
discussion. None of you should try to stop me!" Prince
Arulmozli Varma spoke decisively. He then turned his eyes
upon Poonkuzlali who was leaning on the far pillar and
gazing at him with unblinking eyes.
"Ocean Princess, please come here," he called.

Poonkuzlali came closer. "Girl, you have been of great
help to me by bringing this news; will you please help me
one more time?" he asked.
Oh, Dear Lord! What is this? Is he asking help from
this poor boat-girl? I came here to be his serving maid; he
begs for my help! I came asking boons of the Lord; the Lord
is extending his own two hands and begging me for alms!
With such racing thoughts, she said, "My Lord, I wait to
fulfil your every command."
"Ocean Princess, you said that two ships are waiting
near the mouth of River Thondai looking for me. I have to
reach that place as quickly as possible. Will you be my
guide and take me there?" asked Arulmozli.
"Girl, say that you cannot do it," roared a gruff voice.
She recognized it as the Commander’s. She had been
wandering in a dream world. Only now she realized the
tricky situation she was in. I came running, eager to help
him from a danger; now, he asks my help in meeting that
very same danger. She now understood the meaning behind
the Commander’s order "Say you cannot do it." Thousands
of songbirds from every tree branch gave her the same
order; the trees sang the same slogan; the pillars roared
the same order; the flowers wailed.
A soft voice in the heart of her heart whispered.
`Poonkuzlali, this is your good fortune. If you guide the
Prince and go with him, you can spend two full days in his
company! You can be constantly looking at him. The breeze
that touches his body will caress you. You will hear his
voice often. Your impossible dream -- a tiny bit of it will
come true. Why bother about other things? Accept
Poonkuzlali accept!’ said the whisper in her heart.
"Why do you hesitate Ocean Princess? Won’t you help
me? Do I have to find my own way?" These words of the
Prince steadied her thoughts.

"I am ready to be your guide, My Lord."
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama cleared his throat; it was
like an earthquake rising from the bowels of the earth. He
did not give up, "Prince, I will not stand in the way of your
wishes. But please accept this petition of mine. It is my
duty to guard you till we give you up to those who have
come to arrest you. Your friends spoke about the attempts
on your life last night. We have not yet found those
assassins. We do not even know their identity. Please
forgive me for being so outspoken -- I have some doubts
about this girl. Perhaps she is an accomplice of those
killers. Maybe all this story about ships that have come to
arrest you is all her imagination. Why is that not possible?
Sometime back when Lord Vandiya Devan plucked her
dagger and threw it away, we heard a scream. Who was it?
Let her be the guide; Let her ride ahead on our elephant. I
insist on accompanying you till we see those ships on River
Thondai. It is my duty to do so."
Prince Arulmozli stood up with a smile as he listened
to this speech by his Commander. "Let it be so. I shall not
be an obstruction to your duty."
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 44 -- The Elephant Turned Rogue
Once the decision was reached, Commander Bhoothi
Vikrama led Parthiban aside and spoke to him in privacy for
some time. Later, he called for several of his men and gave
them separate orders.
Parthiban Pallava came to take leave of the Prince.
"Sir, I return empty handed without achieving my mission.
Prince Karikala will be very angry with me about this. What
can I do -- you are so adamant? It is not my fault and these
men will be witness to that!"
"Do you have to leave in such a hurry? Could you not
come with the Commander till River Thondai?"
"I cannot be an accomplice to that atrocity. My ship is
anchored at Tricone Hill. I have to go back there and sail as
quickly as possible to Kanchi; I have to report all these
developments to Prince Karikala." Parthiban then turned to
Vandiya Devan, "Noble of Vallam, are you not coming back
with me to Kanchi?"
Vandiya Devan was somewhat taken aback, "No. I wish
to go with the young Prince."
"Suit yourself. You might regret not coming back with
me!" Parthiban left with these cryptic words, accompanied
by some men.
Vandiya Devan asked Azlvar-adiyan, "What did that
Pallava mean? Why did he say that I would regret not going
with him? Did you understand his words?"
"He and the Commander are cooking up some plot
between themselves. We will soon know what it is. The root
cause of this new confusion is really this old man of
Kodumbalur!" said Azlvar-adiyan Nambi.
"Why is
responsible?"

that?

How

could

the

Commander

be

"It’s all his conniving. Don’t you know of that
noblewoman of his clan living in Pazlayarai?"
"I know her very well, if you mean Lady Vanathi."
"The Commander dreams of wedding that girl to this
Prince and making him the King of Lanka. It was he who
instigated the Buddhist leaders to offer Lanka’s throne to
Prince Arulmozli. He was not even sensible enough to keep
his efforts secret! The news reached Tanjavur and that is
why Prime Minister Anirudda journeyed to Lanka and later
sent messages through me! Thambi, whatever happens,
one thing must be done without fail: we have to safeguard
both our lives! You and I may have to testify in Tanjavur
about the Prince refusing Lanka’s throne."
By now the Commander’s arrangements had been
completed. Except for four men, all the other soldiers who
had come with him were now dispatched in different
directions. Finally, the Prince and his party left. Prince
Arulmozli, Commander Bhoothi Vikrama, Vandiya Devan,
Azlvar-adiyan and four soldiers rode westward on high-bred
horses. The elephant carrying Poonkuzlali followed them
ponderously. Only an elephant driver rode on its back
besides Poonkuzlali.
They followed the Royal Way for some distance. But
travelling along that road was not easy. Crowds gathered
all along the way. People ahead somehow knew that Prince
Arulmozli was coming down that road. The western
provinces of Lanka were mostly inhabited by Tamils in
those days. People gathered in small crowds to raise
cheers, "Long live Prince Arulmozli!" "Long live
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama!" At some places they
surrounded the horsemen and followed them in a
procession. The numbers of people following the Prince
began to grow and grow. The horses could not proceed with
any quickness.

Arulmozli argued with the Commander about this; they
decided to avoid the main road but take the byways and
forest trails. Somehow, they shook loose from the people
and ventured into the forest path. But nature in the form of
thick jungle obstructed quick progress on the forest trail.
After a while they reached a lotus pond. When they reached
its shores, they could see a large group of people waiting
on the farther shores. Upon seeing the royal party, they
began to blow conches and horns; beating drums and
cymbals -- generally raising a hue and cry!
"Please wait a while. I’ll go and find out what it is all
about," said the Commander as he rode towards that
crowd. He came back soon to announce, "These villagers
have somehow come to know that the Prince is in our
party! They are waiting to welcome him into their village
and honor him."
The people gathered closer, surrounding the Prince,
gazing upon his face eagerly, cheering for him. The cry,
"Long live Lanka’s King Arulmozli!" was prominent!
A smile danced on Arulmozli’s face. He summoned a
man who seemed to be the chieftain of the country folk.
"Why are these people bestowing Lanka’s Kingship upon
me?" he questioned. The head-man bowed very reverently,
"My King, this territory of Lanka has been suffering without
a good king for several years. It is our wish that Ponniyin
Selvan should become our King. It is the wish of every
citizen living in this island. Everyone -- the Singhalese,
Tamils, Buddhists, Saivas, monks and householders -- wish
it."
They had made arrangements to honor the Prince and
his company with a banquet. The Prince could not avoid
these honors; he was delayed greatly by these
interruptions. During these ceremonies in honor of their

Prince, Vandiya Devan and Azlvar-adiyan were able to
converse in privacy.
"Thambi, did you see this? Isn’t it obvious that all this
is the Commander’s conniving? He sent his men ahead and
arranged for all these honors and celebrations."
"It is somewhat obvious that these are the
Commander’s arrangements. But what is the purpose of
this conniving? Does he think that the Prince who refused
the crown will change his mind when he hears the people
saying things in his favor?"
"Perhaps that is one intention; the main thing is to
delay our journey."
"What is the Commander expecting to achieve by
delaying our journey?" asked Vandiya Devan.
"I don’t know! But we will know soon enough. Did you
notice the Prince -- it is obvious that he does not like all
these things."
Vandiya Devan looked at Prince Arulmozli. His
countenance which normally wore a pleasing smile now
seemed to be filled with rage and anger. Eyebrows knitted;
eyes deep in thought.
At this same time, Poonkuzlali was seated alone on the
other side of the lotus pond, lost in thought. This journey
did not bring her joy as she had expected. She had
envisioned that she could be alone with the Prince during
the journey. She thought that he would come to her, engage
in conversation with her... She had been eager to express at
least a few of the emotions that bubbled within her heart.
There seemed to be no opportunity for that -- people were
around him all the time! Mere blame that I handed him
over to the enemy will remain! Why should I earn that
blame? Why shouldn’t I go away quietly from here? At least
I will escape the Commander’s anger.... Chee! What can the

Commander’s anger do to me? Whose anger can do
anything! I am not afraid of anyone’s wrath. But why
should my dreams and desires be lost in dust? How long
should my heart’s desire burn me like this? Why am I alive?
Why doesn’t lightning strike to kill me instantly? I have
wished a thousand times about such things, with no use....
my life will not depart by itself; I have to do something
about it myself.
"Swish!" Oh, what is this? Am I dreaming? No, no.
How has my knife -- thrown away near the roofless pavilion
by the Prince’s friend -- fallen here by my side? Who could
have thrown it here? Some enemy of his, surely! They may
have tried to kill me ... What bad luck that it did not strike
me but fell a little away! All’s for the best anyway. It’s good
to get back this knife. After I keep my promise to him, after
I have handed him over to those villains on the ships, I can
kill myself with this knife before his eyes. Stupid girl! Why
should I hurt him? After he leaves, I can sail away to the
shoreless ocean and jump to my death. My darling dagger...
you have come back to me ... Thanks to those who sent you
back.
Perhaps they aimed it at the Prince when they threw
this dagger. Yes, even the Commander anticipated danger
on the way. Oh, why doesn’t a knife aimed at him strike
me? When that happens, when I lie bleeding to death ....
A curious vision appeared in Poonkuzlali mind: A knife
had pierced her heart and she was bleeding. The Prince
came running to her side, "My Dear you are losing your life
for me!" he said. Her heart brimmed with joy and more
blood came gushing out. The Prince raised her to his arms;
her blood drenched his clothes and arms. Poonkuzlali
laughed merrily, "Prince do you now know the secret of my
heart?" she asked. "Wretched girl, I knew it always; are you
giving up your life because of that?!" he cried. Her
happiness knew no bounds and she laughed uproariously.

"You Fool!" called a voice; she looked up to find
Vandiya Devan standing before her. "The Prince is already
quite angry because the journey is delayed. Come quickly
without causing further delay."
Poonkuzlali rose with a smile and she ran to climb on
her elephant, hugging and kissing her dagger.
An unexpected incident occurred after they had been a
while on the forest trail. An arrow came swishing through
the wind from the forest on their right. It was clearly aimed
for the Prince. But he was swifter than the wind as he
suddenly pulled the reins of his horse and turned aside. The
arrow pierced through the turban of Azlvar-adiyan who was
riding on the other side. He rubbed his shaven pate and
looked at his head cloth with surprise. The Commander was
shaken; all others were utterly shocked. Poonkuzlali was
sad because that arrow had not pierced her heart and
killed her!
"Did you see that, Prince? What a calamity, if I had let
you go without any guards?" said the Commander. He
ordered his men to go into the woods and search. The men
came back in a while saying that they could find no one.
The Commander began making plans, "We should let the
Prince ride in the middle and all of us should be around
him."
"A request Commander!" said the Prince.
"What a
Commander.

word!

Order

me

My

Lord!"

said

the

"I wish to reach Tanjavur with my life intact. I wish to
prove my innocence to my father."
"You father will never suspect you of any crime!"
"Not just my father. I wish to prove my innocence to all
the people. After that, I have no worry about my life. I have
no wish to die before that on the way."

"Sir, if there is any likelihood of danger to you, that
very instant this great-sword of Kodumbalur will pierce my
heart!"
"That is not of much use; Chozla countrymen will lose
a great warrior."
"The Chozla country has no greater loss than loosing
you. How can this knave of Kodumbalur remain alive after
being instrumental in endangering you?"
"So, it is even more important for me to safeguard my
own life!"
"Nothing is more important on this earth."
"I have an idea about that."
"I am listening Sir."
"As long as I am riding a horse, all sorts of
impediments like that arrow might strike me."
"Are you planning to walk?"
"I know the art of handling elephants. You know that I
am very good with elephants, they listen to me without
fail."
"Yes Sir. I know that you have surveyed most regions
of this island disguised as an elephant-driver."
"So, this is what I propose: I will become an elephantdriver for a while once again. Let the real elephant-driver
ride my horse for some distance."
The Commander seemed a little hesitant. He looked
around for an objection to this idea. But every man kept
quiet."
"Sir, I am not sure if that man knows how to ride."
"If he does not know riding, let him walk or go back."
"That girl seems very bashful; suppose she refuses to
sit by your side on the elephant?"

"Let her get down and walk."
"As you wish My Lord."
Arulmozli jumped off from his horse and walked up to
the elephant. Poonkuzlali’s dark eyes widened with
eagerness. The Prince helped the elephant-driver dismount
and jumped upon the beast’s neck. The interrupted journey
resumed.
Poonkuzlali was overjoyed. She leaped from the
elephants back, to promenade in distant space on flying
clouds. She reached the brink of paradise and sipped the
sweet nectar of happiness that could not be described by
words. Ah! Is this heavenly music that is so melodious?
Heavenly music is not this sweet! The Prince is saying
something.
"Ocean Princess are you revolted to be alone with me
on this elephant?"
"Lord, I have this good fortune because of penances
over seven births."
"Will you be frightened if this elephant suddenly turns
rogue and begins running?"
"With you by my side, I will not be frightened even if
the skies come thundering down."
"Where have you left your boat, Poonkuzlali?"
"Very near the landing of Elephant Crossing, Sir."
"On this shore or the other?"
"I found a secret place only on the other shore. I left
my boat over there."
"How did you ford the Crossing?"
"When I came, the tide was very low. I could walk most
of the way; I had to swim a little."
"Will you be afraid if this elephant gets into the sea?"

"I won’t be afraid even if I am thrown into the sea.
Remember I am the Ocean Princess? You gave me that
title!"
"When we get to the place where your boat is hidden,
we can get into it. You have to row the boat; can you pull
the oars with two people in it?"
"These hands have pulled oars from when I was ten,
My Lord. They are not soft like the hands of women from
palaces. Didn’t the Lord of Vallam, your friend, tell you that
I rowed him over here?"
"He mentioned it. But today you may have to row
faster than that. We have to go very quickly to the mouth of
River Thondai where the ships are anchored."
"My Lord, why are you forcing me to do this cruel
deed? I came hurrying to help you escape being arrested.
You now order me to deliver you to those who have come to
arrest you. Why this malice towards this poor girl?"
"Poonkuzlali, don’t you know that my father, the
Emperor is unwell?"
"I know My Lord. I also know that people are talking
about the comet appearing in the skies since some days."
(Note: It was a popular belief that comets appeared
when important men, such as kings, national leaders,
prophets etc. were about to die.)
"My father’s life is likely to end anytime now."
Poonkuzlali was silent. "Suppose he were to die, is it
good if he dies with a doubt that I perhaps conspired
against him, trying to capture the kingdom?"
"The Emperor will never think such things of you. This
is the intrigue of Pazluvoor nobles."
"I wish to prove my innocence even to those Pazluvoor
nobles."

"Why My Lord?"
"Poonkuzlali, to tell you the truth, I have no wish to
rule any kingdom."
"What is your wish Sir?"
"I wish to be on a ship sailing away, endlessly. I have
heard that there are several lands beyond the seas, like this
Lanka. I wish to see all those lands. I wish to speak to the
people of all those lands."
"How curious, how astonishing!"
"Why is it curious?"
"I am amazed that you too have the very same wishes
that dwell in my heart. Will you take me with you when you
embark upon these journeys across the sea?"
"I have to first fulfill my present duty. Will you help me
in that?"
"As you wish."
"There are ropes hanging on both sides of the saddle
on which you are sitting. Take them and bind yourself
tightly to the elephant."
"Why My Lord?"
"This elephant is going to turn rogue. Don’t panic, be
careful." He gently rubbed the round musth-protrusions on
the elephant’s forehead and spoke softly into its ears.
Suddenly, the elephant quickened its pace. Arulmozli spoke
more soft words into its ears. Walk turned into a run: the
elephant lifted its trunk high into the air, trumpeted
frighteningly and began to run. The trees and shrubs of the
jungle felt the ferocity of a whirlwind when that beast ran
helter-skelter, thrashing trees and branches. The earth
shook and shivered. Birds on tree-tops fluttered their wings
noisily and flew away in panic. Beasts hidden in the forest
emerged to run away in fright.

The Commander screamed, "Oh Good Lord! The
elephant seems to have turned rogue! What calamity is
this?"
In spite of the Prince’s warning, Poonkuzlali was filled
with dread; her face reflected the fear in her heart. She
was caught in a huge tornado on a wide sea; she was
swimming round and round, caught in those swirls with
Prince Arulmozli! The elephant swirled with them!
Poonkuzlali closed her eyes tight. Like dark monsoon
clouds racing across stormy skies, the elephant ran. It
finally reached Elephants Crossing.
The seas to the west and east of Lanka met at this
point in a narrow isthmus. The narrowest point of the
straits was called Elephant Crossing. The elephant entered
the ford that linked Lanka’s northern province with the
middle provinces. It delved into the sea like a mountain
thrown by Hanuman of the epic.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 45 -- Prison Ship
Elephant Crossing went past within the blink of an
eyelid; and then forest trees began running behind. Birds
flew far behind... streamlets, pools, ponds, temples and
hamlets flew behind. A herd of deer tried to compete with
that elephant and ran along for some distance; but they too
were soon left far behind. The elephant kept going, and
going, going ahead.... Poonkuzlali was not sure how far,
how long or which way. She wondered if that elephant was
still in Lanka! By now, at this pace it could have circled this
Lanka three times! No, no! This elephant has not crossed
Lanka, it has crossed this whole good earth! It has gone
from the southern ends to the northern reaches. I am riding
on its back and circumnavigating the earth! And with me is
the Prince!
She was a little frightened in the beginning when the
elephant ran in panic. A fear from not being able to
comprehend what was happening... The Prince turned back
twice or thrice to look at her and smile. Her hesitations and
fears flew away. Endless joy took hold; for a while she was
riding a huge elephant of this earth; somehow, suddenly,
she was in paradise. She was seated on Airavata, the
heavenly elephant of Indra the Lord of Heavens. Airavata
was ambling along the streets of paradise in procession.
Everblooming Karpaka trees showered fragrant flowers on
her. Ghandarvas the heavenly musicians, played sweet
melodies upon divine instruments and followed her.
Heavenly beauties danced. Star-light lamps glowed
gloriously on both sides of her procession. Several such
eons passed.
Airavata was slowing down. Suddenly it came back to
earth; back to the forests of Lanka. The elephant-driver was
bending low, stroking its musth-protrusions; whispering
into its ears. Oh no! he is no elephant-driver --- he is the

king of heavens! He is Prince Arulmozli! Ponniyin Selvan!
The elephant was standing peacefully on the shores of a
tiny lake surrounded by trees. Poonkuzlali looked around
with concern: are there crowds of villagers waiting to
welcome their prince? No. Are there horses following? No.
Look at the pond. The water lilies and lotuses rose with
their vines and came to encircle her. The flowers and vines
fell on her cheeks, her shoulders and arms ... hugging her,
choking her, making her breathless. She shook herself free
of those clinging vines. She felt as if she was tumbling
headfirst, from heaven to earth. The elephant folded its
large forelegs and began kneeling. It folded its hind legs
also to lie flat on the ground. Arulmozli jumped down from
its neck. "Poonkuzlali have you no heart to get off this
elephant?"
Poonkuzlali shook herself to consciousness. "Sir, it is
difficult to come down to earth from paradise." The
elephant stood up and broke off a large tree branch from
the shore, stuffing it entirely in its gaping mouth. Arulmozli
walked away to sit on the bank. He beckoned hesitant
Poonkuzlali to come and sit beside him.
Her face was reflected on the placid lake. Because of
the running elephant and her agitated thoughts, her face
had turned lotus red. The Prince was looking at her face
reflected amidst the lotus blossoms, "Poonkuzlali, I like you
very much!"
Once again, the lily vines and lotus flowers rose to kiss
Poonkuzlali.
"Do you know why I like you?" asked Arulmozli.
Everything before her eyes -- the sky, the earth the lake and
the flowers -- everything was in a dizzy swirl. "Everyone I
know wants me to act according to their wishes. You were
the only one who happily agreed to act according to my
wishes. I will never forget this help Ocean Princess!"

Poonkuzlali was a lute; her nerves were its strings;
golden fingers plucked those strings and played heavenly
melodies.
"The Commander and Parthiban conspired to hinder
my journey. The Commander created several obstructions
on our way. He hurried the men ahead of us and made the
villagers arrange festivities. Lord Parthiban Pallava has
gone to Tricone Hill in a hurry. He intends to board his ship
and sail to the mouth of River Thondai before we reach that
spot. Ah! Did they think that I would not know their
conspiracies! I defeated their purpose with your help..."
Instantly, Poonkuzlali realized the implications of her
actions. She felt the messengers of hell torturing her in an
endless oil-press. "My Lord, all of them tried to save you
from being imprisoned by enemies. I am a sinner -- leading
you to be imprisoned," sobbed Poonkuzlali.
"Oh dear, what is this? I had such a good opinion of
you! You too have become one of them!"
"I was not in my senses when I did this atrocious deed.
I was mesmerized by your sweet words to become insane. I
am more sensible now; I think I shall leave...." She rose
with a jump.
The Prince, wishing to stop her from running away,
lightly held her hand. Divine maidens in heaven seemed to
have been free without any other work at that moment.
They mixed the essence of moonbeams with sandal paste
and showered it on Poonkuzlali. She was completely lost;
bereft of action, of thought, she sat down once again.
"Ocean Princess, I was about to speak with you about
an important thing. If you are going to be sobbing like this,
I shall not speak of it. We better leave immediately."
She wiped away her tears to look up. He continued
speaking, "Listen; you said that they were trying to prevent

my being arrested. That is true. But do you know why?"
"Because of their love for you. I am the sinner..."
"Patience, patience. Everyone loves me! Do you know
why? Because of some predictions by astrologers and
soothsayers -- that I would one day rule as an emperor!
Therefore, everyone is trying to sit me on a throne and
weigh me down with a crown on my head. Avaricious folk."
"My Lord, what is wrong if they wish such things? Are
you not qualified to rule not merely this one world but all
the worlds in creation?"
"Oh dear! You too have begun speaking like them! My
dear, in this wide world, there is no prison like a palace;
there is no sacrificial alter like a throne; no other
punishment worse than wearing a crown. If I say such
things to others, they may not agree. I thought you might
understand."
Poonkuzlali’s eyelids fluttered like the wings of a
butterfly. She looked at the prince with eyes widened by
eagerness. "Ocean Princess! Tell me the truth! If you were
ordered to sit upon a throne all life long, would you do so?"
She considered this question for a bit and then replied
clearly, "I will not!"
"See! Then, why do you wish me to suffer such a
punishment?"
"You are born in a royal family?!"
"So, what, if I am born in a royal family? Fortunately,
the Gods did not wish to make me suffer that punishment! I
have an elder brother to rule the kingdom; also, a son of my
elder grandfather... he too wishes to rule..."
"Oh dear! Has that rumor reached your ears too?"
asked Poonkuzlali.

"What a thought! Did you think that I did not know?
Anyway, the Throne of Tanjavur is not likely to suffer for
want of rulers. Moreover, I have no wish to wear a crown
and rule a kingdom."
"Do you have any wishes at all?"
"If you ask me, I shall tell you! Remember our journey
on this elephant just now? I have a wish to ride like that, a
tornado through the forests and plains beyond. I have a
wish to board large ships and sail across several seas. I
have a wish to climb the highest peaks of mountain ranges.
I have heard that across the oceans, there are many islands
like this Lanka, even larger and many continents even
bigger than our blessed country. I wish to go to all those
places and look at the wondrous marvels of those
countries."
Poonkuzlali listened to this outpouring of words in
open mouthed rapture as if she was drinking in every word.
She could not control her eagerness, "Sir! When you go to
all those places could you take me with you?"
"I merely expressed my wishes. Who knows if they
would be fulfilled?" asked Arulmozli Varma.
She came back to earth from her dream-world. "Sir, if
that is your wish, why should you go back to Tanjavur
now?"
"I was about to explain that. But you changed the topic
and made my thoughts wander. Ocean Princess, there is a
speechless mute woman who wanders here and there on
this island as if she is deranged. Do you know her?"
"I know her, My lord. Why do you ask?" said
Poonkuzlali with immeasurable surprise.
"I’ll explain later. How do you know that woman? What
do you know about her?"

"Sir, I lost my mother when I was very young. She was
the one who gave me a mother’s love; she is my master, my
goddess. What do you want to know about her?"
"Does that woman have any permanent place of
abode? Or does she always wander around?"
"On the way to Lanka from Kodi Karai, there is an
island called Ghost Island. She lives in a rock cave on that
island most of the time. I saw you for the first time on that
island."
"You saw me there!?!"
"Yes. In that rocky cave are several beautiful pictures
drawn by her. I saw your face in those drawings. Later, one
day when I saw you at Kodi Karai, I was astounded."
"Oh! I now understand. Things that were confusing are
now clearer. Ocean Princess, are you aware of the
relationship that exists between that woman and me?"
"I surmised that there was a relationship. But I do not
know what it could be."
"Poonkuzlali, she is my aunt, my Elder Mother.
Lawfully, she is the lady who should be on Tanjavur’s
Throne."
"Good Lord! Can this be true?"
"But fate wove a different story. Who could undo that?
It occurred to me quite often that some secret sadness in
my father’s heart distressed him. Now, I have found the
truth of that matter. My father thinks that my Elder Mother
is dead and that she died because of him. I must go back
and tell him that she is not dead, she is alive. If he knows,
his heart’s distress will be expunged; the mental agony that
wastes him will be destroyed. You are aware of the
Emperor’s ill health; human life is not forever. None can
predict what may happen. A comet has been appearing on
the skies for some time now. People have been

apprehensive about that. Even the Emperor has been
affected by those fears. In this situation, before anything illfated happens, I must tell him about what I have found out.
Ocean Princess, that is why I wish to reach Tanjavur as
quickly as possible. Do you now realize how important your
help will be?" asked Prince Arulmozli.
Poonkuzlali, who had been listening with interest,
sighed loudly; "Oh Good Lord! Why did you design such
sorrow along with all the happiness of human life!" she
mumbled. Looking up at the Prince, she said, "My Lord, if
you are helped in any way by my unfortunate self, it is
because of my good fortune in many births. But why do you
need my help in all this? If you had spoken to the
Commander, he would have arranged for you to go to
Tanjavur."

"No. I do not wish to discuss
these matters with any of them.
They are obsessed with somehow
placing me on a throne; such
matters will not seem important to
them. Moreover, I do not wish to
share my father’s personal secrets
with them. They will not be
sympathetic. I need another favor
of you Ocean Princess -- that is why
I stopped the elephant here and
started
talking
to
you.
The

astrologers and soothsayers who
gave me a throne and made me a
monarch
also
predicted
that
several dangers will cross my path.
If some such misfortune happens to
me on this journey, .... if I am
unable to meet my father, .... you
must go to the Emperor. Meet him
somehow and let him know that my
Elder Mother is alive. If he wishes
it, take her to him. Can you do that
Poonkuzlali?" asked Arulmozli.
"No misfortune will cross your
path. Danger will fear to face you
and retreat. You will surely reach
Tanjavur safely."
"If something does happen to
me, you will promise to do as I
asked?"
"I promise My Lord."

"How
can
I
entrust
this
important mission to anyone else?
Tell me."
"You have entrusted the job to
me. Now my usefulness is done.
Can I take leave of you?" asked
Poonkuzlali with a tear laden voice.
"How can you do that? We have
not yet reached the mouth of River
Thondai. We have not yet found the
Chozla warships. How can you
leave now? Don’t be angry; be
patient for a while longer and bear
my company. Climb back on this
elephant and come with me some
more. Once we see the Tiger-flags
of the Chozla ships, we can part
company," said the Prince.
Without a sound in reply, she rose and walked towards
the elephant. In obedience to his commands, the elephant
folded its legs and allowed them to climb on its back. He
did not goad the elephant but it did move quickly. "Ocean

Princess, I have told you about some of my favorite wishes.
What are your cherished wishes?" asked the Prince.
"I like Yama the Lord of Death who comes riding a
dark water buffalo. I love to climb the rocks at midnight
and gaze for hours at fiery ghouls that dance on marshes."
"You are a most peculiar girl!"
"Call me `foolish’ like your friend did. But I am not
bothered... And then I like to get into my small sail-boat
and float away on the waves of the vast seas. If a whirlwind
happens on the open seas, my enthusiasm will cross all
bounds. My boat will then rise to the highest crest of the
waves and touch the skies; in the next instant it will crash
into the deepest depths. There is nothing I like better than
riding the waves of a stormy sea. Just now when this
elephant ran wildly as if it had gone mad, I was ecstatic."
"Poonkuzlali, if God Muruga had come in search of
your smile he would have been at a loss. His tricks of
sending an elephant to frighten the Gypsy Valli before he
won her heart would not work with you."
They had reached the mouth of the river. Poonkuzlali
shrieked in surprise, "What is this?"
"What is the matter?" asked Arulmozli.
"The ships flying Tiger-flags are not here, where I had
seen them. What will you think of me? This seems to
confirm the Commander’s suspicions; it seems as if I
tricked you and brought you here!"
"I will not think so, Poonkuzlali. There is no reason for
you to trick me and bring me here."
"Why not My Prince? What about love, kaadal? The
whole world is full of praise for you -- handsome as
Manmatha the God of Love and gallant as the epic hero
Arjuna. You are the Darling of the Cauvery, Ponniyin
Selvan; a foolish girl could have become enamored of you

and done this foul deed. Could she not?" asked Poonkuzlali
in some agitation.
"If the Commander were here, he would have perhaps
suspected such things. But I am sure that in your heart and
in my heart, there is no place for such foolish thoughts."
"Sir, will you say the same about that noblewoman
Lady Vanathi who lives at Pazlayarai?"
"Well, I have not forgotten that! This Commander and
my sister are together in trying to foist that girl around my
neck. Perhaps that ignorant girl also nurtures hope because
of a wish to sit on a throne. I cannot be held responsible for
that. Poonkuzlali forget that. Where were the ships when
you saw them?"
"There, they stood at that turning. I remember very
well."
"Perhaps they have moved a little here or there. Let us
go down to the beach and have a look."
"Good, if those ships have gone away. Why should we
go looking for them?" asked Poonkuzlali.
"You may think so, but I shall be very disappointed."
Three hundred years before this time Prince
Manavanman of Lanka had sought asylum at Kanchi.
Maamalla Pallava had promised to regain his kingdom for
him and sent a large Tamil army to help the Lankan Prince.
Those forces had landed in these parts when they came to
Lanka. In those days the mouth of the river was a mere
stream. The soldiers of Thondai Territories had deepened
the river channel and widened the river mouth so that their
warships could anchor safely. That river channel, which
came to be known as River Thondai, meandered in and out
as it entered the sea. Forest trees grew thickly up to the
river bank. Several ships could anchor safely in the river
without being visible from the sea.

Poonkuzlali had seen the ships that had come to arrest
Prince Arulmozli, anchored in one curve of the river. But
the ships were not where she had seen them earlier -- that
is, she could not see the sails, or flags or mastheads. When
they came closer to that spot, a startling sight met their
eyes. A ship had moved far inland away from the deep
channel and was now buried in the mud. It’s masthead,
sails and flags were broken and torn. The ship did not seem
to have any human occupants. Poonkuzlali recognized it as
one of the ships she had seen two days earlier.
She was shocked to see that one of the ships, which
had come to take her Prince prisoner, had gone adrift to be
mired in the muddy bank.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 46 -- Turbulent Soul
Prince Arulmozli whispered secrets into the elephant’s
ear. The elephant knelt down and both Poonkuzlali and
Prince Arulmozli jumped down. They walked up to the
wooden ship now beached on the sandy shores. The ship
was in a pitiable state: mast beams were broken and
strewn helter skelter. They wondered if anyone was there
or anywhere near about. The Prince clapped his hands and
called out. Poonkuzlali cupped her hands over her mouth
and called -- no answering sound arose. They waded into
the shallow water and climbed up the sides of the ship. The
bottom planks of the ship had split; sand and water had run
into the hull. Their hopes of somehow pushing the ship
back into sea and setting it afloat were now dashed. It
would be impossible to move that ship from there into
water; one elephant could not drag it into water. Several
elephants and several men would have to work on it. They
would need strong ropes and a few tugboats. Many
carpenters would have to work many months to make that
vessel sea-worthy once again.
Prince Arulmozli picked up the torn and mutilated
Tiger-flag lying amidst the ruined deck. It was obvious that
its state caused him much anguish. "Poonkuzlali is this one
of the ships you had seen?"
"Seems like it. The other ship must have completely
sunk to the bottom!" Her voice seemed to have some cheer
as she uttered these words.
"Why this delight?" asked the Prince.
"Should I not be happy if the ships that came to
imprison you are sunk and beached?"
"Your delight is misplaced Ocean Princess. Some
calamity seems to have occurred. It disturbs me that such
misadventure should occur to an armed ship that flies a

Tiger-flag. We don’t know how this happened. What
happened to the soldiers and sailors on this ship? I am
more and more confused by this wanton destruction I see.
Do you really think that the other ship must have sunk?"
"Perhaps it is sunk. It is good if that is so."
"It is not good and it cannot be. Seeing the fate of this
ship the other one might have moved away to deeper water.
Why did this ship come so far inshore? Chozla sailors are
descendants of sea-going men of several generations. I
cannot believe that they made a mistake to accidentally
drive this ship into the sandbank. The men must have
somehow escaped from here. They might have gone aboard
the other ship or camped somewhere nearby. Come, let us
look for them."
"Where can we look for them, Prince? The sun is
setting and darkness is gathering upon us from all
directions," said Poonkuzlali with some worry.
"Ocean Princess, where did you leave your boat?"
"My boat is further up river. We came here so quickly
because we rode on that swift elephant and because you
drove it so skillfully. If we had come by my boat we would
have taken much longer."
"That’s alright. Let us walk a little along this river
bank before it gets too dark. These trees are hiding the sea.
Perhaps they have anchored the other ship away from the
coast. Let us go look."
They left the elephant there on the bank and walked
towards the sea. Very soon they were on the beach. The sea
was calm; not even the sign of a soft wave. As far as the eye
could see was one shimmering platter of jeweled green.
Very far away the green of the sea mingled with the hazy
blue of the sky. But there was no sign of any ship or boat.
One or two sea birds flew towards the beach. That was all.

After walking about that beach for a few minutes, Arulmozli
said, "Well, let us go back to that beached ship."
They turned back the way they had come.
"Poonkuzlali, I shall never forget how helpful you have
been. But now the time has come for us to part."
Poonkuzlali was quiet.
"Did you hear me? I have decided to wait near that
shipwreck. The Commander and his retinue will soon find
this place. I shall decide on what to do next after I consult
with him. So, there is nothing more for you to do here. You
may go find your boat and leave. Remember what I told you
about my father..."
Poonkuzlali seemed tired and hesitant. She was
leaning back on one of the coconut palms on that bank; her
hands gripped the fronds of a drooping palm leaf.
"What is it Ocean Princess? What is the matter?"
"Nothing, Prince. Nothing. I shall take leave of you
here itself. God be with you"
"Angry, Poonkuzlali?"
"Angry? What right has this foolish girl to be angry
with you? I have not yet become that conceited"
"Then why have you stopped here suddenly?"
"I am not angry Sir, but very tired. It is two nights
since I had a wink of sleep. I plan to sleep for a while
somewhere here and then look for my boat and leave."
It was the day after the full moon. A brilliant moon was
just rising over the seashore. A moon beam or two danced
over her face. The Prince turned to look at her face and
gazed at the tiredness and sadness reflected on the
features. Her eyes were already half closed. It is nature
that a lotus closes its petals when the moon rises. However,
Poonkuzlali’s lotus face was not only closed, it was wilted.

"My dear girl? Two days since you slept? How many
days since you ate anything?"
"Two days since I have eaten. I never felt any hunger
as long as I was with you."
"How idiotic of me! This afternoon all of us feasted at
that village banquet. I did not even remember to ask if you
had eaten! Come Poonkuzlali, come with me to the
shipwreck. I saw scattered grain all over that broken deck.
Tonight, we will collect that grain and cook a meal; you can
leave after eating."
"Sir, after eating I will go to sleep right there. Even
now I am very tired."
"So what? You can sleep comfortably on the deck. I
shall wait on the bank with the elephant and guard you. You
can find your boat in the morning." Arulmozli took hold of
her hand and half hugging her, walked her towards the
ship. She was really tired. Her unselfish devotion touched
his heart and brought tears to his eyes.
When they came upon that ship once again, they were
shocked by a new sight. Smoke rose in a spiral from behind
that deck. Perhaps the ship’s men had returned after going
somewhere. If they appeared suddenly in front of them,
what would they think... So, they walked softly with silent
steps. They had come very close, but had heard no sound or
speech. Who was hidden there? How many? The sweet
smell of yams being roasted assailed their noses.
Prince Arulmozli decided that his first task was to feed
Poonkuzlali. He walked around the beached ship. A woman
was making preparations to cook; she had gathered stones
into a stove and lit a cooking fire. He recognized her. She
did not seem surprised to see them. Perhaps she was
expecting them. She welcomed them silently and soon
served them delicious food. Arulmozli found the meal of
stewed grain and roasted sweet-yam more delicious than

all the gourmet foods he had eaten at royal banquets in
Pazlayarai. After eating, all three climbed up to the deck.
The moon had risen high. From the deck they could see the
mouth where River Thondai flowed into the sea, and
beyond that, the expanse of the sea itself. The water which
looked like a shimmering emerald in the light of dusk now
shone like gold in the moonbeams. Arulmozli remarked that
it was very humid and stuffy with not a whisper of a breeze.
Somehow the old lady understood him. She touched
Poonkuzlali’s shoulder and pointed to the grey ring around
the moon.
Poonkuzlali explained, "If the moon is encircled by a
grey ring, it means storm and rain is soon to follow."
"Oh, let it storm, let it rain. All I want now is a little
breeze. I wonder how she came here so quickly!"
"Nothing surprises me about my aunt. She is capable
of more astonishing deeds," said Poonkuzlali. "There is no
limit to the love she has for you. The power of love can do
anything, did you not know?"
Her aunt seemed to understand her. She turned
Poonkuzlali’s face around and pointed to the far bank. Their
elephant was tied to a tree over there and by its side stood
a beautiful, well-bred stallion. Arulmozli and Poonkuzlali
were surprised.
"Did she ride that horse here? I did not know that she
could ride a horse!" said Arulmozli.
"There is nothing that my aunt does not know. She can
ride a horse and drive an elephant. She can row a boat.
Sometimes I used to wonder if she could glide over the
winds! She travels that quickly from one place to another. I
would often wonder how she could have come so quickly."
Prince Arulmozli was now pondering over another
astonishing fact. It was the appearance of that beautiful

Arab stallion grazing on that bank. He was muttering to
himself, "This seems to be one of the best of the exquisite
breeds of Arab horses. How did it come here? How did this
woman get it?"
Poonkuzlali was talking in sign language to her aunt,
the Mute-queen. (Yes, from now, shall we refer to her as the
Mute-queen?) She was saying that the horse had swum
ashore near Elephant Crossing. When it had come ashore,
it seemed to be dazed and stood about wildly on the sand.
Mute-queen had patted it and talked to it till it had calmed
down. Later she had ridden it here. Arulmozli was even
more surprised by this. He noticed that Poonkuzlali’s eyes
were closed and that she was falling asleep. "You said you
were sleepy. Go and rest." She moved aside and pulling a
sailcloth over herself was soon asleep. Soon, a steady
breathing indicated that she was in deep sleep. Even then
her lips trembled and warbled the words of a song softly,
When wave-filled seas are still,
Why does the inner ocean seethe?

Ah! This is the song that Vandiya Devan was humming
all day long. Perhaps he learned it from her! When she is
awake, I must ask her to sing it for me.
He turned towards Mute-queen. Ah! It is true that
everyone’s heart is in turmoil. Everyone’s soul brims with
emotion. But with what can one compare the anguish of
this old woman who cannot even express her emotions in
words? How many emotions, wishes, urges, what
happiness, what sorrow, how much anger and frustration
has she stifled in her thoughts? For how long? ....
Mute-queen rose and came to sit beside Arulmozli. She
wove her fingers through his curls and brushed his hair
back. With her roughened palms she brushed his cheeks as
if caressing some exotic flower. Arulmozli did not know
what to do. After a while he rose and bowed to her,

touching her feet to his eyes. She picked up his palms and
held them to her face. Very soon, his palms were wet with
the tears pouring from her eyes. She signed that he too
should sleep. He was not sure if he could sleep. But to
satisfy her, he lay down on the deck and closed his eyes.
For a long time, his heart was in turmoil with conflicting
thoughts. After some hours, a cool breeze rose over the
water. The breeze cooled his heart and body. Soon he was
asleep.
It was a disturbed sleep full of dreams, incredible
dreams. He was riding a well-bred Arab stallion and flying
across the skies. He had crossed the cloud world and
entered the realm of Gods. Indra the King of heavens
welcomed him to ride on Airavata, the celestial Elephant.
He was seated on the heavenly throne. "O! I do not want
this; I wish to place my Mute Aunt on this throne" King
Indra laughed and said, "Let her come here first, we can
think about it later." Indra gave him a goblet of heavenly
nectar and asked him to drink it. "Ah!, this does not taste
as delicious as Cauvery water!" Indra took him to the
women’s palace. Several heavenly maids were dancing
there. "Choose the most beautiful among them for
yourself!" said King Indra. "None of them can stand a
chance against Poonkuzlali," said Arulmozli. Suddenly
Younger Pirati Kundavai came to stand beside Indra’s
Queen. "Arulmozli, have you forgotten my Vanathi?" she
asked. Arulmozli said, "Akka, Akka! How long are you going
to keep me a slave? Lord Pazluvoor’s dungeons are better
than the prison of your love. Free me please! Or, like Prince
Uttara of Virata, keep me inside palace walls. I can spend
my time in dance and song!" Princess Kundavai placed a
flower like finger on her coral lips and looked at him in
surprise. "Arulmozli, how did you change like this? Who
corrupted your heart? Yes, my dear brother, love is a kind
of bondage. You must be bound by it." He replied, "No,

Akka, no. You are wrong. There is love without bondage.
Shall I show you? here, I shall call her, you can see...
Poonkuzlali... Poonkuzlali... come here..." he called out in
his sleep.
Poonkuzlali woke up hearing hoofbeats; day was
breaking in glorious splendor. She saw Mute-queen seated
on her horse, ready to ride away. She ran down trying to
stop her. However, before she could climb down the sides of
the ship, the old woman had flown away like the wind.
Day break was beautiful. Poonkuzlali’s heart brimmed
with untold happiness. Prince Arulmozli was still asleep on
the deck. She walked along the river bank; a huge parrot
was perched on a low branch. It did not fly away but gazed
at her face as if asking, "Where did you come?"
"My darling parrot! The Prince will be gone from here
in a few minutes. After that you are my only companion.
Will you talk to me?" asked Poonkuzlali.
She then heard the call "Poonkuzlali! Poonkuzlali!" For
a minute she thought the parrot had talked. But the voice
came from the ship. She climbed back on the deck to see
him sleeping. But his lips mumbled her name! She was
drowned in a sea of emotions and placed her palm on his
forehead.
Arulmozli came awake from his dream world. The
golden sun was peeping up on the eastern horizon.
Poonkuzlali’s face was blooming like a lotus. "You called my
name, why?"
"Did I call you by name? I must have mumbled
something in my sleep. Last night you were singing in your
sleep. Why should I not talk when I sleep?" asked Prince
Arulmozli. "Oh dear! I have been asleep too long. Where is
Elder Mother?" Poonkuzlali told him about how she rode
away early in the morning.

"Good. Ocean Princess, you seem rested and refreshed
now. You can go now. I have to wait here till my friends
come. I plan to examine this ship more carefully."
"Look over there!" she pointed to the far horizon.
Far away across the expanse of sea they could see a
large sailing ship. A row boat was coming towards the
beach. Four or five persons were in that boat.
"Aha! Things may be clearer now," said Prince
Arulmozli. Not wanting to miss that boat, he quickly
climbed down from the deck and walked towards the sea
shore. Poonkuzlali followed; the elephant ambled behind
them. Soon they were upon the beach. The ship seemed to
be moving farther and farther away. The row boat was
coming closer and closer. Poonkuzlali who was hesitant for
a while, now moved forward with curiosity. The Prince was
amused by her curiosity. A smile danced on his lips. But
there was cause for concern.
He felt that he should have been on that ship which
was going towards the horizon. It was leaving him behind.
Moreover, one person seemed to be missing from the
rowboat coming shoreward. Yes, Commander Bhoothi
Vikrama was there; Mr. Azlvar-adiyan Thirumalai Nambi
was there. Two soldiers and a boatman -- they were all
there. But where is that youth of the Noble Vaanar clan?
Where was the Lord of Vallam? Where was Vandiya Devan
Vallavarayan? Where was that cheerful young man, that
brave soldier? That fearless warrior? That messenger sent
by my dear sister Kundavai Pirati ....
Even though it had been a mere two days, Prince
Arulmozli felt that Vandiya Devan had become his longtime
friend. Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan’s character and nature
had so enchanted the Prince. He was somewhat
disappointed and saddened to not see him in that boat.

The boat had landed and the Commander and other
men now jumped to the ground. Commander Bhoothi
Vikrama ran to the Prince and enclosed him in a tight
embrace.
"Sir! What have you done? How could you frighten us
like this? How was the rogue elephant tamed? Look at it!
How is that rogue so calm and quiet now? Prince, when did
you come here? Did you meet those ships sent by the Lords
of Pazluvoor? Where are they now?" the Commander rained
a shower of questions.
"Commander, I will tell our story later. Where is Lord
Vandiya Devan? Tell me!" said Arulmozli Varma.
"Oh, that imprudent youth is on that ship which is
sailing away." The Commander was pointing at the ship
sailing away near the horizon.
"Why? Why? Whose ship is that? Why is Lord Vandiya
Devan going away in that?" asked the Prince.
"Sir, I am totally confused now. Ask this Nambi. He
seems to understand your affairs and the affairs of that
young man."
Prince Arulmozli turned towards Azlvar-adiyan and
said, "Mr. Thirumalai why is Vandiya Devan going on that
ship? If you can, explain quickly."
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 47 -- Ghoulish Laughter
We are duty bound to tell our readers about what
happened to those who were left behind when Poonkuzlali
and Prince Arulmozli rode away on the rogue elephant.
"The elephant has turned rogue!" shrieked the
Commander; and everyone believed him. They galloped on
swift horses trying to catch up with that elephant. But that
was impossible; their journey was blocked when they
reached Elephant Crossing. As usual, Vandiya Devan rode
ahead before everyone. He drove his horse into the ford;
the horse was caught in the mud of incoming tide. It was
with much effort that they freed the beast; however, the
horse was no longer fit for travel.
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama was perplexed and
unable to take any decision. He kept banging his palms on
his forehead in dismay, "Such a mishap has never happened
in my whole life! Why are you all so quiet? What shall we
do? Tell me, how shall we save the Prince? Does anyone
have any ideas?"
Azlvar-adiyan stepped forward and spoke, "Sir, I have
an idea. Shall I express it?"
"Are you waiting for an auspicious time to speak? Tell
us quickly!"
"The elephant on which the Prince rode away. ... it has
not really turned rogue or gone mad."
"What are you blabbering? Who turned mad? you?"
"No one has gone mad or rogue. The Prince suspected
that you were unnecessarily delaying his journey. He
incited the elephant to escape from us and went away
quickly. We are all aware that the Prince is an expert in
handling and taming elephants," said Azlvar-adiyan Nambi.

The Commander felt that there could be some truth in
this idea. He felt a little reassured.
"Perhaps. I hope so. Anyway, we should go to the
mouth of River Thondai and find out what happens over
there."
"Yes, we have to go. We must walk along this sea-arm
and look for a boat to cross this tide. Or we can wait till
Lord Parthiban Pallava comes with his ship."
"Mr. Nambi! You are a cunning fellow. Perhaps you
influenced the Prince somehow..."
"Sir, I have not spoken a single word to the Prince
since we started on this journey."
After this, the party began walking eastward along the
land bridge which was now covered with the rising tide.
The northernmost tip of Lanka was a narrow-necked
peninsula known as Snake Island. The sea reached around
in two narrow arms separating the two land areas. (See
Map) Snake Island was connected to the main island of
Lanka by a very narrow strip of land known as Elephant
Crossing. At low tide this land bridge was usually above the
sea level and crossing was easy; at other times when the
land bridge was immersed in water, crossing was difficult
unless one had a boat. Since elephant herds usually crossed
at this point, the ford came to be known as Elephant
Crossing. In ancient times elephants were exported on
ships that sailed from here.
At this time almost all the boats and ships in Lanka
were either at Mattotam or Tricone Hill. Still, the
Commander and his company looked for some kind of small
craft that might have been left behind. Finally, they found a
small rowboat belonging to a Karaiyar fisherman. There
was only one boatman and he refused to oblige. Finally, on
realizing that it was the Chozla Commander, he agreed to
take them. They crossed the ford on the boat and reached

the other side. How were they to reach the river mouth? It
was not easy to find their way across the forest. And, it
would take much time. So, they decided to continue in that
same boat along the eastern coast till they reached the
mouth of River Thondai. The boatman pulled the oars till
midnight. After that, he was tired. He refused the offer of
help from others.
"The coast is not easy from now onwards. We have to
change directions very often and only those who are
familiar with these parts can venture with the boat. If it hits
any of the rocks the boat will be smashed into pieces. We
can continue only after day break," said the boatman.
The Commander and his men were also tired. They
decided to spend the night in a grove of trees on that shore.
Vandiya Devan was not happy with these activities. He
picked a quarrel with Azlvar-adiyan. "All this is because of
you!" He accused the Vaishnava.
"Now, what did I do?" asked Azlvar-adiyan.
"You never speak the complete truth. I have been
watching you from Kadamboor. You say something and
keep the rest secret. You guessed the Prince’s intentions
about that elephant. Why did you not share that with me? If
I had known, I too would have climbed on that elephant and
gone with him. We have once again lost the Prince whom
we found with much difficulty. What am I going to tell the
Younger Pirati at Pazlayarai when I go back?"
"Your duty was done when you delivered the message
and letter. Why worry now?"
"That’s not it. My duty is done only after I take the
Prince back to Pazlayarai and the Younger Pirati. It looks as
if even you will hinder my efforts."
"No, my dear man no. I shall not hinder your effort. I
shall take leave of the Commander in the morning and then

go my own way."
"Your task is done. The Prince has been delivered to
the enemy and so you wish to leave. I always suspected you
and now, I am sure!" said Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan.
After this quarrel they too went to sleep.
When day was breaking in all its glory, Azlvar-adiyan
woke up on hearing the sounds of a row boat. The sight
before his eyes shocked him. A ship in full sail was a little
away on the sea. It seemed ready to lift anchor and sail
away. A row boat was going towards that ship from the
shore. Three men in addition to the boatman were in that
craft. Azlvar-adiyan did not need much time to realize that
it was the boat that had brought them here last night. Very
soon he guessed how that ship had appeared there so
suddenly. The grove where they had camped was on the
shores of a sea-arm. The sea had burrowed in a long
narrow channel into the land. Trees hid the channel from
all sides. The ship must have been hiding in that channel
and sailed after day break.
Whose ship, was it? Where did it come from? Where
was it going? Why was the rowboat hurrying towards it?
Who were the men in the boat? These questions flashed like
lightning through Azlvar-adiyan’s mind. "Commander,
Commander," he shouted.
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama and Vandiya Devan and
the other two men jumped awake. They saw the sailing ship
at first. "That is a Chozla ship. Perhaps the ship sent by the
Pazluvoor fellows! I wonder if the Prince is on that ship?
What a terrible mistake to have fallen asleep!" said the
Commander. He then asked, "Where is our boat? Let us see
if we can catch the ship!"
By now he had spotted the rowboat. "Oh, Good Lord!
That is the boat we came in. Who are those men in it? Hey
you, boatman! Stop! Turn back!" he shouted.

It is not clear if the boatman heard this or not. He did
not stop. In truth he hurried ahead. Vandiya Devan stood
listening to this and watching. The words, "The Prince is on
that ship!" uttered by the Commander, penetrated his ears
and embedded in his mind. After that there was no scope
for any other thought! No doubts about what he should do!
His legs needed no orders! The next minute he had jumped
into the sea. He pushed the waves aside with his powerful
arms and began swimming. Fortunately, the water was not
too deep! Very soon he had gone far away and reached the
row boat. Now the water had suddenly become very deep.
"Oh, Good Lord! I am drowning, help me!" he shouted.
Someone in that boat laughed. There was some
conversation. The boat stopped and the boatman lent a
hand to pull him in. Vandiya Devan was now seated in the
boat which sped ahead.
Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan examined the other men
in the boat. One was not of the Tamil people at all! He
seemed to be of the Arab nation. How did he appear here?
With some surprise he examined the other two. They had
hidden half their faces with their head-bands. But they
were natives of these parts, of the Tamil lands. The faces
were familiar. Where? Where did I see these faces? Yes ...
these are the men who came back with Parthiban Pallava
from Dampallae! Azlvar-adiyan identified them as the
assassins who came to kill Prince Arulmozli. In fact, I have
seen one of them somewhere else! Is he not Ravidasa the
Sorcerer? He hooted like an owl and came secretly to meet
Young Queen Nandini of Pazluvoor. Oh well, perhaps they
know that Prince Arulmozli is on that ship and that is why
they are hurrying there! Another danger on the way! It is
good that I hurried to catch this boat....
The boat was fast approaching the ship. The men were
silent. Vandiya Devan could not tolerate the silence. He
tried to strike up a conversation.

"Where are you all going?" he asked pleasantly.
"Don’t you know? To that ship over there," said the
Sorcerer. His face and mouth were half covered and his
voice sounded ghoulish.
"Where is that ship sailing to?" asked Vandiya Devan.
"We will know that only after we reach that ship!" said
Ravidasa the Sorcerer.
Silence reigned once again. Only the sea sounds
reverberated. Ravidasa disturbed the quiet, "Where are
you going young man?"
"I am also going to that ship."
"And then where are you going?"
"That will be known only after we board the ship."
Vandiya Devan read the lesson back to him.
The boat stopped beside the ship. A rope ladder was
dropped from above. One by one the others climbed to the
deck. Before they could pull it up, Vandiya Devan took hold
of the ladder and clambered up. There was some sort of
talk on the deck. It was an unfamiliar language; he quickly
jumped on to the deck. He looked around quickly, shouting,
"Where is the Prince?"
Even his iron heart was badly shaken by the sight that
met his eyes. Several Arabs of frightening stature stood
around him. Each one looked like a demon in disguise.
Everyone was staring at him and none gave him a reply.
Vandiya Devan realized that he had made a big
mistake. This is not a Chozla ship; it cannot be. These are
not Tamil sailors. These are Arabs who bring the huge
horses for trade. It is impossible that the Prince will be on
this ship. I have been too hasty in coming here. How am I
to escape? He ran to the side and leaned over to call,
"Boatman, Stop!" he was about to jump down when an iron

fist grabbed his throat from behind. One pull and one push
Vandiya Devan was on the floor of the deck.
A humongous rage filled his thoughts as he jumped up
and punched the face of the man who had pushed him
down. That six-foot-tall Arab toppled the man behind him
and fell to the deck. A frightening growl was heard behind
him; fortunately, Vandiya Devan turned back in time.
Otherwise, a knife would have plunged into his back. As he
turned, with one swift motion he pushed away the knife;
the knife hit the deck with a clang and bounced into the
sea. In the next instant five or six men had surrounded him
and held him prisoner. They talked amongst themselves in
some un-understandable language.
Their leader gave some commands in a harsh tone.
They brought some rope and bound his hands and feet.
Four men carried him down to the lower deck. Throughout
this, Vandiya Devan kicked and struggled to get free. He
was not successful. They carried him down to the hold and
threw him on a stack of logs down below. They tied him to
one of those logs and left. The ship swayed this way and
that. It had started moving on its journey. The logs began to
roll and he could not protect himself because his hands
were tied.
"If I escape from this predicament, I shall not venture
into anything hastily. I shall do things after considerable
thought like that Azlvar-adiyan Nambi." Vandiya Devan was
making resolutions when he heard some ghoulish laughter
next to him. He turned his face with some effort to find
Ravidasa standing next to him. He had now removed the
mask hiding his face.
"Dear fellow! I came in search of that Chozla tiger cub.
I did not find the tiger cub. Instead, I have found the
Vaanar jackal. I am fortunate!" laughed the Sorcerer.

Of these aforesaid incidents, the men were aware only
up to the point when Vandiya Devan boarded the ship. Even
the boatman did not know about the incidents on the deck.
He had quickly returned to the shore.
The Commander and his men got into the rowboat.
They knew that they could not catch up with the sailing
ship; so, they decided to continue to the mouth of River
Thondai and look around. Perhaps the other ship is still
there. Maybe, the Prince is on that other vessel. Anyway,
they would come upon some information. They questioned
the boatman thoroughly. He knew nothing, "I was sleeping
in my boat. At sunrise someone came and woke me up.
They promised to pay me a large sum of money if I took
them to the ship. I thought that I could be back before you
all woke up. So, I took them. I know nothing else."
Azlvar-adiyan retold this history as far as he knew it,
to the Prince.
Further, "Prince, when Vandiya Devan jumped into the
sea, for one moment I considered following him. But I am
somewhat hesitant about the sea. Neither am I a good
swimmer. Moreover, I had my own doubts about the ship
that is sailing away. I felt that you could not be on board
that vessel. I even doubt if it could be a Chozla ship. I have
mentioned this to the Commander. We decided to come
here before we do anything further. We were reassured
only after seeing you here," said Azlvar-adiyan Thirumalai
Nambi.
Arulmozli had listened attentively to all that was said
by Azlvar-adiyan. "But I am not reassured Thirumalai.
Vandiya Devan is on that ship. The Lords of Pazluvoor will
arrest him and throw him in Tanjavur’s dungeons!" said the
Prince.
The Commander intervened, "Prince why do you
tolerate the impertinence of those evil-doers? If only you

would agree, I would control the insolence of those
Pazluvoor lords by the next full moon and throw them in
their own dungeons."
"Sir I do not think that you should even dream that I
would act against the tiniest wish of my father," said Prince
Arulmozli.
Hearing the hoofbeat of a fast-approaching horse, they
turned around. The horse stopped a little away from them.
They were surprised to find a woman riding that great
stallion without any saddle, stirrup or reins.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 48 -- The Commodore’s Death
Prince Arulmozli recognized the woman on the stallion
immediately. He hurried towards her; Poonkuzlali followed.
The others hesitated a little behind. By then, Mute-queen
had dismounted. She looked worriedly at the men and then
spoke in sign language to Poonkuzlali. "My aunt has seen
something curious in the forest. She asks us to go over
there."
Prince Arulmozli made up his mind to do so
immediately. He asked Poonkuzlali to find out if the others
could go also. Mute-queen considered this for a minute and
then nodded approval.
As they followed her into the forest, they discussed the
remarkable horse she had ridden. It was a wonderful, high
bred stallion from Arabia. How did this woman get such a
horse? No troops had landed in these parts in recent times;
there had been no recent conflict or war campaign here...
how did she acquire the horse?
Our readers are aware of the Chozla ship that had run
aground in the marshes near the mouth of River Thondai.
Lanka’s coast meandered towards the south-east from this
point. The sea often reached out in winding and twisting
narrow arms, going far inland and often forming deep and
narrow tidal basins. The ship that Vandiya Devan and his
friends had seen in the morning had emerged from hiding
in one such inland bay.
The Mute-queen was now leading them south-eastward
into the deep coastal forest. As they walked quickly,
Arulmozli’s curiosity was aroused. Something important
must have occurred; otherwise, this lady would not lead us
so far. In an instant the incident was clear before them.
They could see an inland lagoon in the midst of a
clearing in the forest. Some men lay dead on the shores of

the water. The smell of dead bodies mingled with the smell
of drying blood. Dead men’s bodies and bloody carnage was
nothing new to any of those warriors who had seen many
battlefields. Even so, a thought rose in their minds:
something mysterious, frightening, and bizarre must have
occurred -- disgust mingled with curiosity.
They went closer and examined the dead bodies to find
that they were all sailors from Tamil lands. "Quick, quick!
See if anyone is still alive!" ordered the Prince. His men
began to examine each body individually. Mute-queen
signed and led the Prince further away towards a tree
beyond the water’s edge. A terrifying figure lay prone
beside that tree; it was a human being though his
appearance made that difficult to believe. Every visible part
of his body seemed to be wounded. Open wounds on his
head were bleeding covering his face in a gory sight. His
face, which was awaiting death any minute now, blossomed
in a faint smile when it beheld Prince Arulmozli. He opened
his lips and tried to speak; but the blood that had caked in
his mouth came gushing out making him appear even more
ghoulish.
Prince Arulmozli hurried to his side ordering, "Quickly,
bring him some water!"
That man said, "No need My Lord! This woman gave
me water a little while ago. If she had not come, I would
have died long ago. My Lord, I have suffered here in this
life itself, the consequences for committing treason against
you. I am sure that the Good God will not punish me once
again for this, in my after life!"
On hearing his quivering voice, Prince Arulmozli
peered at his face, recognizing it. "Commodore! What is all
this? What are you saying? How did this happen? What
treason did you come here and commit? I cannot believe
that of you!"

"My Lord, you say that out of the compassion and
generosity of your nature. I came here on the orders of the
Lords of Pazluvoor, to arrest you and take you back to
Tanjavur. Here is the order." The Commodore who was at
deaths gate pointed weakly at a letter pouch hidden in his
waist-belt.
Prince Arulmozli did not take more than a minute to
glance through that order. "Where is treason on your part
in this? You came to obey the orders of the Emperor.
Knowing that, I was hurrying to meet you. Meanwhile, how
did this misfortune come upon you? Tell me quickly."
"I know; I have to be quick; else I may not be able to
share it with you at all!" After that, the Commodore retold
the following tale, with many a pause to regain his fading
breath.
On receiving his orders from the Emperor, the
Commodore left with two ships from the port of
Nagaipattinam. He was not happy with his assignment; but
unable to oppose the Emperor’s orders, he left. As he was
leaving, the Lords of Pazluvoor had given him certain strict
instructions. First, as soon as he reached the shores of
Eezlam (Lanka) he was to anchor his ships in some hidden
isolated spot and proceed after finding the whereabouts of
the young Prince. Later, he was to personally meet the
royal Prince and give him the Emperor’s orders.
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama should not come to know of
this matter. After the orders was delivered, if the Prince
came willingly with him, it was well and good; if he
resisted, the Commodore was to arrest him and bring him
back. After this, the nobles of Pazluvoor had sent some of
their confidential retainers to accompany the Commodore.
The Chozla Commodore left with a heavy heart; the
men under him were not aware of the details of their
mission. He worried about how he would explain the

assignment to his men. He anchored his ships near the
mouth of River Thondai and left with a small company of
sailors to the port town of Gangesan Thurai, wishing to
ask around about how he could find the Prince. He found
out that the Prince was inspecting parts of Southern Lanka
and came back to his ship.
By that time his seamen somehow came to know the
truth about their journey. Pazluvoor men in the ships had
talked; and the news spread. The Chozla sailors gathered
around their chief and began questioning him. "Have we
come here to arrest Ponniyin Selvan? The darling of our
Cauvery?" The Commodore told them the truth, "We are in
service to the Emperor. We have to obey his orders." The
men were not pacified, "We cannot do so; these cannot be
the Emperor’s orders. The Pazluvoor nobles must have
given the orders and we are not bound to obey them!"
On hearing their cries, the Commodore asked them,
"Then what do you wish to do?"
"We wish to go to Mattotam and join the Prince’s
army."
"The Prince is not in Mattotam."
"We can seek asylum with Commander Lord Velir of
Kodumbalur."
The Commodore tried to argue with them and tried to
convince them in many ways. But that was impossible. Only
ten men, including the four from Pazluvoor, were ready to
stand by his side. How was he to control two hundred men
with ten?
So, he gave them permission, "Fine, get lost
immediately. And be responsible for the consequences. I
shall do my duty as far as possible."
Some of the sailors wished to take one of the ships and
sail to Mattotam. Others objected. Finally, they abandoned

ship and left by land. In their hurry, they did not anchor the
ship properly. In the night the ship moved with the
incoming tide and hit the sandbar. Its hull was broken and
the ship was beached. After this mishap, the Commodore
did not wish to remain in that spot with his other ship.
There was further cause for his concern. At Gangesan
Thurai he had heard some alarming news. A few days ago,
an Arab pirate ship had sunk on the rocky shores north of
Mullai Island. Some of those ruffians who had escaped
were now wandering in these parts. Therefore, he did not
wish to remain near the beached ship. He navigated one of
the narrow sea arms which went deep inland and anchored
his ship in the concealed spot. That night they discussed
further action and decided that the ten men were to remain
with the ship guarding it. He alone would journey south
and find the Prince. But the men were not happy with the
idea. Even as they were discussing alternate plans, several
men surrounded them with terrifying cries. They were men
from Arab countries. The Tamil men did not expect this
sudden attack. They were making camp and were not
prepared for a fight. None had any useful weapons in their
hands. Still, they fought a valiant and vicious battle. And all
had lost their lives.
"My Lord, I alone ran with all my death wounds and
hid myself in the forest. I saved myself merely to tell
someone about what really happened. My Prince, I was
fortunate to meet you in person and tell you all of this
shameful tale. I have received the punishment due for my
treacherous acts. My Lord Ponniyin Selva! Please forgive
me!" said the Commodore of Chozla ships.
"My most dutiful Commodore! Why should I forgive
you? If in truth there is a heaven meant for the brave who
die in battlefields, you will surely reach that abode." The
Prince comforted the dying man and soothed his brow.
Tears flowing from the Commodore’s eyes mingled with the

drying blood on his face. With much effort he lifted his
palms and folded them in greeting to the Prince. The
Commodore’s tears washed the Prince’s hands. Teardrops
peeked at the corners of Arulmozli’s eyes. Very soon the
Commodore’s spirit left his body.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 49 -- Ship Hunt
They placed the Commodore’s body and all the other
dead bodies in one pile; with dry wood collected from the
forest they made a funeral pyre. Commander Bhoothi
Vikrama noticed that tears were streaming down
Arulmozli’s face when the funeral pyre began burning.
"Sir, you shed tears for these sinners! God has given
justice to the traitors who came to imprison you. Why do
you grieve for them?" asked Commander Bhoothi Vikrama.
"Commander these men are not traitors; neither am I
grieving for them. I lament that such distressing times
should become the lot of the Chozlas!" said Prince
Arulmozli.
"Distressing times came as soon as Pazluvoor fellows
came into our country. Nothing new has come about now!"
growled the Commander.
"Indeed, things new have come about! What worse
doom can befall a nation than the fate that a ship’s men
would mutiny and disobey the orders of their Commodore!
Commander this is a small sign, a mere crack. I wonder
what other, bigger cracks are about to undermine this
Chozla Empire. If such fractures occur, the very
foundations laid by my forefather Vijayala Chozla will be
shaken and this great Empire destroyed. Should this
catastrophe come about because of me? I have heard the
story of Mahabharata. When Duryodhana, the evil cousin
was born, wolves and jackals howled ominously -- says the
story. Wolves and jackals must have howled frighteningly
when I was born also!" said Arulmozli the royal Prince.
"My Dear Sir! Whatever good omens that can ever be
seen were seen when you were born! The astrologers who
computed your horoscope ...."

"Stop it Commander, stop it! My ears are tired of
hearing these words. Forget the fate of my horoscope....
Anyway, the time has come for us to part. I have another
request of you. If those sailors and soldiers who mutinied
against their Commodore come to you asking to join your
command, you must not accept them. Arrest all of them
immediately and send them back to Tanjavur."
"Sir, we have heard the version told by the
Commodore. We have not found out what the sailors have
to say. How can we pass sentence by merely hearing the
story of one party. That is not proper law or justice. Please
come with me. When those men arrive at Mattotam, we
shall make proper enquiries and then decide...."
"Sir, that is not possible now. You do what you think is
appropriate. I cannot tarry even a minute longer in this
place. I shall leave immediately. Where is that boatman?"
"Where do you wish to go, Prince? Why do you want
that boatman?"
"Do you need to ask me such a question? I have to find
that ship that is carrying away Vandiya Devan. That brave
man has boarded a ship under the control of evil Arab
pirates, entrapped in grave danger because of me! How can
I abandon him? Do I have to add to the heinous sins
committed by me by forsaking a dear friend in need?"
asked Arulmozli.
"Sir, I am not aware of any sin committed by you.
Neither will the world accept even if you swear it. Vandiya
Devan is a hasty and imprudent youth. How could you
become responsible for dangers that he tempts upon
himself? How does betrayal of friendship come into the
picture here? Prince, I do not even like the fact that you
should embrace some wandering fortune seeker as a dear
friend! Only men of equal status can become friends."

"Commander, I have no time to waste on word duels.
Even if I should not call him friend, I am beholden to him.
What have all the ancients, including Valluvar the poet
said? Chozlas never forget a favor! I shall not violate that
fame. I have to leave now and look for that ship."
"How shall you go? Where would you look?"
"I shall go in that boat you came in....."
"How can you hunt a lion with rabbits? How could you
hope to find a sailing ship on the high seas with this tiny
rowboat? Even if you do find the ship, what can you do?"
asked the bewildered Commander.
"I can go in the boat! If the boat collapses, I shall tie
myself to a log raft and swim! Even if that ship carrying
away Vandiya Devan has crossed the seven seas, I will
follow it. After that, if I am unable to save my friend, I shall
give up mine own life in the attempt. Where is that
boatman?" said an impassioned Prince. He noticed the
boatman standing aside talking to Poonkuzlali. Mute-queen
was standing next to them. The Prince hurried towards
them.
He noticed Poonkuzlali arguing with tears of rage in a
passionate manner with that boatman. "Oh Dear! What is
this? Another internal disturbance?" asked Arulmozli.
The boatman suddenly fell at Arulmozli Varma’s feet,
"My Lord, I have sinned unknowingly! I have sinned for
love of money! Forgive me, Oh Lord!" he said.
"What nonsense is this? .... Poonkuzlali? Is everyone
ganged up to make me go mad? Can you explain what this
is?"
"Prince I was ashamed to say it all this time; this
fellow is my brother! He brought those two sinners, the
assassins, from Kodi Karai to Lanka in his boat. He was
waiting on this shore on their orders. This morning he took

them in his boat to that ship we saw sailing at day break.
Your friend is also on that ship..."
"My Lord! Cut me with your sword and kill me
immediately! I did not know that those men were such
heinous traitors! I would have never done it if I knew!
Please kill me with your own hands," wailed the boatman
who was still prostate!
"My Good Man! At this point in time your life is a
priceless treasure for me! Come, let us go! Take me also to
that very same ship. That is your atonement for the
misdeeds committed by you. Hurry, let us go," said Prince
Arulmozli.
The boatman ran to the beach and pulled his boat into
the water. The Prince was examining the horizon with
crinkled eyes. "There! I can see the ship. We can catch up."
Commander Bhoothi Vikrama was also examining the
horizon. "Prince, a ripe fruit had slipped into nectar!" he
said.
"What do you mean? Such good words from you!"
"That ship which I can see is not the ship that has
Vandiya Devan on board. It is the ship of Lord Parthiban
Pallava. It seems to be coming from the direction of Tricone
Hill. It is coming towards us. Can you not see," asked the
Commander with some joy.
"Yes! You are right! That is very good. Parthiban is
coming here with some other ideas; but his coming is
timely. We can hunt the lion with a tiger! I am not going to
wait till that ship comes here. I shall go in this boat and
reach it."
"Prince, along with you, on that boat ... I ..."
"None of you need come with me on the boat. I shall
find it very helpful if you all stay back here... Mr.

Thirumalai Nambi, the orders are for you also! Anyway, you
are a bit afraid of the sea, are you not?"
"Yes, My Lord. I was intending to stay back anyway.
My orders are to guard you as long as you remain in Lanka.
The Prime Minister is at Madurai. I have to go back and
report these developments to him...." Azlvar-adiyan was
saying.
Prince Arulmozli was impatient, "Do that! Poonkuzlali
you too must stay back. Do not worry about your brother -I’ll take care. You said that you had left your boat
somewhere here. Find it and go your way. I shall never
forget you or your help.... Foolish Girl! Wipe those tears
away! What will those men looking at you think?"
After this the Prince went up to the Mute-queen and
was about to bow and touch her feet. She prevented him
from that, kissing his forehead and hugging him in
blessing. In an instant, the Prince had waded into the sea
and jumped into the restless boat.
The men and women on the shore stood watching as
the boat sped away. Prince Arulmozli in the boat kept
gazing at the people left behind on the shore. He glanced at
everybody once; and his eyes came to rest on the tear laden
face of Poonkuzlali.
What a surprising phenomenon! As one draws farther
away, things should grow smaller to one’s eyes -- the
figures of all others on that shore did indeed grow smaller
and smaller. But Poonkuzlali’s face alone seemed to grow
bigger and bigger. It came closer and closer to the Prince.
Arulmozli shook himself once and turned his eyes away. A
scene from the previous night’s dream came back to him:
his sister, Younger Pirati Kundavai Devi’s words, "Thambi!
Don’t forget that Vanathi is waiting here for you!" came
floating clearly above the noisy waves.
***

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 50 -- Aabathudavis
Parthiban Pallava was filled with an astonishment that
was impossible to describe. When he saw Prince Arulmozli
on the rowboat approaching his ship, he felt as if, God
whom he had gone to worship, not only appeared in person,
but also spoke, "Ask and every wish of thine shall be met!"
Still, why is he coming alone like this in a small boat? What
happened to the ships sent by the nobles of Pazluvoor?
Perhaps he is not aware that this is my ship -- he thinks that
this is one of the ships that came to take him prisoner!
Soon his doubts were cleared. As soon as he came
aboard, Prince Arulmozli brought Parthiban Pallava up to
date on the events that had transpired in northern Lanka
with a few brief words. "Vandiya Devan is in a ship seized
by Arab pirates. We must somehow free him."
Parthiban was transported with joy by the news
brought by Arulmozli Varma. "Everything is shaping up
very well. If that imprudent fellow had not been so hasty
things would have been even better. However, we should
not abandon him to foreigners. That ship could not have
gone too far. We can catch up with it."
He called for his ship’s Captain and explained the
situation briefly.
"We need not be concerned about that My Lord. If the
wind blows steadily like this, we can catch that ship before
nightfall. That ship cannot escape us. It has to go towards
Kodi Karai and sail along the coast," declared that
experienced Sea-captain.
Nevertheless, the Lord of Winds was disposed
otherwise. By and by the wind was dying down. By mid-day
even a whisper of a breeze was not alive. The sea was
utterly calm without a shimmer of a wave. An unbearable
mugginess descended on them. The Sun-god shone his fiery

light on the sky showering flames on the water. Of course,
the sea was not hot to touch: it did not appear like a sea of
water, rather sea of boiling, smoking oil. Sun-rays shone
like molten metal on the water. The ship did not move
though every sail on every mast was fully unfurled. Soon,
even the sound of fluttering sails hitting against their masts
died down. There was no sound from the masts and crossbeams; no sound from sail cloth rubbing against ropes; no
sound of a ship cleaving through water. It was an
unbearable quiet.
Prince Arulmozli was becoming more and more fretful
about Vandiya Devan’s fate. "The breeze has died and this
ship is still! How long will this last? When will the wind rise
again? Wouldn’t that ship escape us now?" he asked with
some worry.
Parthiban looked at his ship’s Captain. The Sea-captain
said, "The wind cannot die like this for much longer. A
whirlwind is rising somewhere nearby. It will come soon
and cross our path; or it might miss us and go away.
Whether the whirlwind crosses our path or not, one thing is
certain. The sea is going to rise and boil soon. All this calm
is temporary. By night, mountain sized waves will batter
this ship. We will fly up to the top of those mountains as
well as float down to the depths of deep ravines as we rise
and fall with the stormy waves."
"Is it not dangerous if the whirlwind hits our ship?"
"It is no simple danger! Only God should save us if that
happens!"

"So, it may be impossible for us
to find that ship!" said a concerned
Prince.

"My Lord, the sea and the wind
have no favorites. Our fate must
have befallen that ship too. At
present that vessel too would be at
a standstill...."
"Perhaps, if it had reached some
shore? ...."
"If it is near a coast, the men in
it might be able to land and save
their lives. But their ship will surely
be lost if it is near a rocky coast in
the storm," declared the Seacaptain.
"No calamity is frightening if our near and dear are by
our side!" The faces of lively Vandiya Devan and bashful
Poonkuzlali appeared in his mind’s eye again and again.
Where are they now? What are they doing? What are they
thinking?
Let us now return to Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan
whom we had abandoned in a truly dangerous situation.
He was lying tied to a log, in the hold of that ship
which had come to arrest Prince Arulmozli. He was thrown
amidst other logs and bales of provisions that filled the
hold. For a long time, he was in a daze; the thought that his
hasty, imprudence embroiled him in unspeakable danger
was tormenting him. He worried over these questions again

and again: What ship is this? Who owns it? How are these
rough Arabs and Sorcerer Ravidasa together in this? Where
is this ship going? What will they do with me? No answer
could be found. All his dreams about his brilliant future
were to remain mere dreams. Sometimes a flash of hope: I
have overcome difficulties worse than this; can I not find a
way out of this too? Let me wait and see; as long as my
mind has not lost its cunning; as long as my body has not
lost its breath -- I need not lose all hope.
Once revived by such encouraging thoughts, he began
looking around. It was some time before he could discern
things in that darkness. He saw several weapons piled in
one corner of the hold. The rope was twisted tightly around
his body; but his hands were not bound very tight. It was
possible to slowly free his hands; grab a knife from that
corner; cut the rope tied around his legs and body. After
that? What? The door to this hold is closed. How am I to get
out. After getting out, how am I to face all those rough Arab
brutes, that sorcerer and his companion? -- Even if I am
able to handle all of them, kill them all-- what can I do after
that? Can I single handed, sail this ship? I know nothing
about ships!
I should not be hasty again. Patience is a virtue to be
courted now. They have not killed me; merely bound me.
That is an encouraging thought! What will they do with me?
But as time passed, his patience was severely tested. The
hold grew more and more stuffy: he was being broiled alive
in a steam-pot. Sweat poured down his face and body. He
had not realized that a sea voyage would be so
uncomfortable. He remembered Poonkuzlali and the nightcrossing in her boat. What a cool breeze it was that night!
How comfortable it had been! A world of difference from
that and this. People talk about lime kilns. This must be it.
Soon, he sensed some change. Yes; the ship had stopped
moving. It seemed to be standing still, rooted to one spot.

The humidity became worse. Thirst increased and his
tongue became stuck to his mouth. I cannot be patient
anymore; find that knife and cut these ropes. Let me get
out and explore. There must be some drinking water,
somewhere...
He looked around again -- Ah! in another corner a
mound of coconuts! Why search for salt on a sea shore?
Those coconuts will relieve my thirst and hunger! He
loosened the knots around his wrists and was reaching out
towards a gleaming knife...
Footsteps. Door opening. He pulled his hand back.
Ravidasa and his friend, who had come earlier were
standing on his two sides. "How is the sailing trip my
friend? Is it pleasure filled?" asked Ravidasa.
"Thirst is killing me; some water?" Vandiya Devan
spoke with some difficulty.
"Ah! We are thirsty too. Those wretched fellows did not
leave any water."
"Goddess Kali is more thirsty than all of us. Blood
Thirst!" said the other fellow.
Vandiya Devan turned to look at him.
"Do you not remember me Thambi? You have
forgotten! Remember the divine dancer who was in a
trance after the Gypsy Dance at Kadamboor? Remember
his words in the trance, `Kali wants a sacrifice; sacrifice of
a thousand-year-old-royalty ...’ remember?"
"Yes; I recall -- you are him; the divine-dancer,"
mumbled Vandiya Devan.

"Yes; I am he; Thevaralan. We
came to Lanka to sacrifice a royal
Princeling
of
thousand-year

ancestry. It was not successful. We
tried to send that Vaishnava fanatic
to Vishnu’s Heaven. No success in
that either! But you came into the
trap yourself. I am happy; my
Goddess must be satisfied for now
with the blood of petty nobility!"
laughed Thevaralan.
"Why the delay?" asked Vandiya
Devan.
"How can we sacrifice a brave
young man like you in any ordinary
place? After we go ashore, we have
to gather all the priests, hold a
festival and give you up in sacrifice.
Most important, the Priestess must
be present!"
"Priestess? Who?"
"Do you not know? Nandini, the
Young Queen of Pazluvoor!"

Vandiya Devan considered this
for some minutes. "If you really
wish to do that, give me some
water quickly. Otherwise, I will die
here of thirst."
"There is no water on board Thambi!"
"Aren’t you a Sorcerer?"
"Yes! Yes! I have cast a spell. Are you not aware that
this ship is standing still? By night, a whirlwind will rise; a
storm will swirl around us. Rain will thunder down."
"What use is rain to me? You will be above deck; I will
be here below..."
"You can come up too. Quench you thirst in the rain...
if you listen to us."
"What are you saying?"
"We say that those Arab fiends should be sacrificed to
the Ocean King."
"Why?"

"They wish to take this ship to
Kalinga Country. We wish to
disembark at Kodi Karai or
Nagaipattinam."
"They are six men; ruffians."

"Three are asleep now. The
other three are half asleep. We
three can take care of the three
sleepers now. The remaining three
can them be handled..."
Vandiya Devan gave no reply.
"Why Thambi? Why are you
thinking? We can loosen your knots
if you agree."
Vandiya Devan thought of the
Prince in Lanka. No. Never. He will
never agree to such a plan. He will
never agree to kill sleeping men.
"I cannot. It is abhorrent to kill
sleeping men."
"Fool! These pirates killed
Chozla men when they were
sleeping."
"If others do atrocious deeds,
why should I do the same?"

"Fine; as you wish." Ravidasa picked up a sharp sword
from the pile in the corner. Thevaralan picked up a small
weapon which looked like a pestle with a tassel of iron
spikes. They left without closing or bolting the door.
Immediately after that, Vandiya Devan grabbed a knife and
cut his ropes, freeing himself. He jumped up and picked up
a coconut from the corner. Broke it open and quenched his
thirst. He then hid the rest of the coconuts behind some
sack-cloth. A good sword that would help a good fight was
soon selected. He was ready to step out any minute.

"Thud. Thud." Twice. Two bodies thrown into the sea.
A big shout; some altercation -- clashing swords -- various
such sounds came down from the deck. Vandiya Devan ran
up with a drawn sword. Four Arabs were attacking
Ravidasa and Thevaralan. They were in a perilous position.
Vandiya Devan jumped forward with a roar. The Arab
leader turned around. One swoop of his sword and the Arab
lost his weapon to the sea. A cut graced the pirate’s face
even as Vandiya Devan rushed ahead without a paused
step. With a face turned horrible by the gushing blood, the
Arab came at him with bunched fists. Vandiya Devan
danced aside and the Arab fell with his own momentum,
tripping on his own feet. A cross beam dislodged by his fall
came thudding down on him.
Vandiya Devan fenced with a second Arab for some
time and finally drove him overboard into the sea. Ravidasa
and Thevaralan were not very experienced in arm-to-arm
combat. They were finding it more and more difficult to
tackle the two strong foreigners. Hearing the sound of
something falling into the sea, the two Arabs slightly
turned to see what had happened to their friend. That was
enough opportunity for the Tamil men to finish those
foreigners. All was done.
The three victors sat down to rest on that deck.

"Young Man, you came at the
right moment. How did you free
yourself?"
"You must have cast your spell.
The rope came loose by itself! This
sword appeared in my hands."
"What about your thirst?"
"A coconut appeared above my
head. It broke by itself and poured
milk into my mouth."
"Ah, you are a clever fellow!"
They laughed and laughed at this
joke!
"Thambi, we were testing you.
We had loosened your ropes and
left those weapons by your side;
those coconuts too," said Ravidasa.
Vandiya Devan was not sure if
they spoke the truth. he kept quiet.
"Thambi, think about this. Do you want to be alive? Do
you want to live and go ashore; gaze upon the faces of your

kith and kin once again? Do you wish for wealth and
comfort? Position and power? Tell us if you like that! Join
us, all that will be yours!" thundered Ravidasa.
Vandiya Devan asked, "You killed those sleeping men.
Did you not?"
"We managed only two. The third woke up by then. If
you had come earlier, our task would have been much
easier."
"What law permits the killing of sleeping men? How
could you do that?"
"If you are hesitant of such minor dilemma, what will
you do about major problems? If you are ready to throw
your lot with us ...."
"You keep saying "us"; Who? Who are you all?"
Ravidasa spoke to Thevaralan. "There is no point in
hiding our secrets from him anymore. He must either join
our group or be sacrificed to this ocean. Let us tell him."
"Fine. Tell Him everything," agreed Thevaralan.
"Listen, Thambi, we are the Aabathudavis, the
bodyguards of King Veera-pandiya of Madurai. We have
sworn blood oaths to guard his life with our own...." began
Ravidasa.
"You could not succeed in that! Prince Aditya Karikala
won!"
"How did he win? Because of the foolishness of a
woman! She had much confidence in the powers of her
enchantments. She believed that she could make that
Chozla king-cobra dance to her tunes. Yes, the snake did
raise its hood and dance to her tune. But it showed its
poisonous tongue in between. Our King’s head rolled in the
dust. They took it to Tanjavur; The took the head in a
procession on an open palanquin. Aha! Tanjavur! Tanjavur!

Wait and watch the state to which that city will be reduced!
Wait Thambi, wait!"
As he spoke, Ravidasa’s red eyes widened and spilled
fire. His whole body shook in rage. His teeth ground with
each other and raised a frightening sound. Thevaralan
seemed to be in a similar state.
"What is done is done! What can you do about that
now? You cannot bring back Veera-pandiya to life."
"We cannot bring back Veera-pandiya to life. Even my
sorcery has no such power. But we will take revenge on
those who killed him; we swear vengeance on the killer, his
friends and their very roots and shoots. We will kill those
snakes of the Chozla clan with offspring and family; wreak
havoc on their dwelling and land. Will you join us? Say it!"
"After destroying the Chozla clan, what would you do?"
"We will crown whoever is selected by our Greatqueen."
"Who is your Great-queen?"
"You know her, Thambi. She
Pazluvoor’s Young Queen for now."

masquerades

as

"Then, what about Lord Madurandaka?"
"He too is a snakeling."
"Lord Pazluvoor?"
"Ah! You think we will take that old fool as our King?
We make use of his power and wealth, we ..."
"That’s why your Queen dwells in his house!"
"Correct! You guess well."
"You said that a woman was the cause for Veerapandiya’s death."
"She was also Nandini. She had promised to guard our
wounded King fallen in battle, but could not keep her

promise. We were about to burn her thinking that she had
turned traitor. We let her live because she swore an oath
with us: we will seek blood revenge. She has kept her
promise till this date. If she had not helped, we could not
have achieved this much."
"You don’t seem to have achieved much!" heckled
Vandiya Devan
"Be patient, young man, be patient," said Ravidasa.
Thevaralan now opened his mouth, "He knows our
secret now. But he has not said anything!"
"Thambi, what do you say? Will you join us? Who
know? Luck may smile upon you. You may ascend the great
Tamil Throne of Madurai."
If it had been some weeks ago, Vandiya Devan would
have gladly agreed! But his whole attitude to life had
changed after three days of friendship with Arulmozli
Varma. He had lost interest in trickery and falsehood. He
wished to change the topic, "How did you find this ship?
How did you make friends with those Arab pirates?"
"That was by the power of my spells. We bought some
horses from them at Tricone Hill. We were able to follow
you and your friends everywhere because of those horses.
We saw the Prince crossing at Elephant Crossing. We
decided to come to Thondai Mouth before him and hurried
through a forest short-cut. There we found that our old
friends had captured the Chozla ship. They had lost their
own ship near Mullai Island. They asked us to be their
guide along the coast. We thought we were lucky."
"How?"
"We overheard the conversation between that
snakeling Chozla and his Commander. We heard that he
would somehow return to the mainland. And another thing,
Thambi, there is a female ghoul in Lanka. It was casting

counter spells against our spells and guarding the Prince.
But that ghoul will never step on Chozla country.
Vandiya Devan remembered the incidents of that night
in Anuradhapura. Ravidasa laughed. "Why this laughter?"
asked Vandiya Devan.
"Nothing. I was thinking about those Arabs. You say
how rough and uncultured they were? These men think
nothing of killing men and women. But they have a limitless
love for horses. They said that they do not ride horses in
their country unless the horses are shod with iron shoes
over their hooves. They called us uncultured barbarians
worse than beasts because we keep our horses unshod.
They think it a crime to even sell horses to us. Do you know
what happened this morning?"
"Tell me."
"We had all gone aboard ship. Opened sail and were
about to leave. At that time, we heard a horse galloping on
the shore. That was it. They suspected that it might be one
of their horses which had escaped from the shipwreck near
Mullai Island. One of them insisted on going back to shore
and finding out. They were not ready to leave until he found
out! We came back with him."
"Then?"
"We did not find the horse. We found you! That was
much better. We could put an end to those horse lovers
easily because of you."
"He has not yet answered our question," reminded
Thevaralan.
"I shall answer you. I have accepted allegiance to
serve the Chozlas. I can never join you men."
"Are you one of the Velaikara’s? Have you sworn an
oath?"

"Nothing like that."
"Then why hesitate? You are a soldier of fortune. You
should join the forces that have more opportunity."
Vandiya Devan did not reveal to them that he was now
bound to the Chozlas by bonds stronger than any blood
oath. What reasons does he need to promise life-long
fidelity to the Chozla’s more than a glance in the corner of
her eye or a smile dancing on Kundavai’s lips? And what
about that incomparable friendship of Prince Arulmozli.
After that, could anyone change?
"Whatever it is, I cannot join your murdering group."
"Then get ready to sacrifice your life to the Ocean
King," said Ravidasa.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 51 -- Whirlwind
Not a breeze did blow; no sea stirred; neither did the
ship move. Vandiya Devan gazed quietly at the sea which
looked like a calm and placid reservoir; his heart churned
with a turbulence not reflected outside. Suddenly he
stretched both his hands towards the sea and shouted,
"Ohm! Hreem! Hraam, vashasht!" as if he was casting some
spell.
He had already picked up the broad-sword before
swirling like a wheel, twice or thrice. "Yes, yes! The Ocean
King wants a sacrifice! He wants two braves, two
murderers who kill sleeping men. He will not let this ship
move unless he gets the sacrifice! Come, both of you!
Quickly bend your heads, quick, quick!"
Ravidasa stared in amazement at Vandiya Devan who
was laughing once again like a maniac, "HA HA HA!"
"Thambi, what is this joke about?"
"My Dear Brothers! This is no joke; this is fate!
Sometime ago when I lay bound below deck, I dozed for a
while and saw a dream. A huge, blue spirit, that filled the
horizon from sea to sky, stood before me and said
something. I could not understand its words. Now, it is
clear: this Ocean King wants two men, two experts in
sorcery and witchcraft, two devotees of Kali, as his
sacrifice. He refuses to let go of this ship unless he has the
sacrifice. He is not satisfied with the sacrifice of six Arab
pirates. So, come quickly." Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan
raised his sword.
Ravidasa and Thevaralan looked at each other.
"Thambi, we have not seen anyone with an imagination as
vivid as yours."
"Don’t you believe my words? You think I am making
all this up? Fine ... Oh Ocean King tell them yourself....."

Perhaps the Ocean King had heard his words and
wished to reply! A curious thing happened over that
seascape. A shiver seemed to run through the waters
spreading towards the horizon in all directions. Tiny, tiny
wavelets, a thousand little waves rose everywhere. Just one
minute of this. Next instant, every wavelet was transformed
into droplets of white foam. Those foam waves danced
across the waters spreading here, there, everywhere.
Millions and millions of white Thumbai flowers tumbled
across expanses of green-grass meadows. Yes, a little
breeze, a cool wind hugged that ship for a minute and went
away. The ship shivered for a second. Vandiya Devan also
shivered. Ravidasa laughed even louder, "Thambi the
Ocean has replied; we must give ourselves as the sacrifice."
Vandiya Devan was confused and shocked by the
change that had suddenly come upon the sea. What has
happened to the thousands and thousands of wavelets?
Where have the million droplets of foam gone? The sea is
calm once again. Did I imagine differently just a minute
ago? Perhaps this Sorcerer had cast some powerful spell....
"Look Thambi, the Sky God approves of the Ocean
Kings wishes." He was pointing towards the horizon -- a
blue sky mingled with the green water -- a thick black pillar
was rising towards the sky. The pillar had a fiery red top
that swirled swiftly. Vandiya Devan would not have even
remarked upon this ordinarily. Odd shaped clouds were
natural; particularly over the sea. But at that time, even
that small cloud kindled terror in his heart. `I should not
fall into a trap of this cunning Sorcerer.’ He steadied
himself once again. "Do not hesitate come ..." said Vandiya
Devan as he began to swing his sword.
"Thambi, we are ready to be sacrificed; before that,
give us a few minutes to offer prayers to our chosen
Goddess," asked Ravidasa.

"Fine, finish your prayers quickly and came back. Do
not try any of your sorcery spells on me! They will not
work."
"We will be back in a minute. See, we will leave our
weapons here." They dropped their weapons and moved
aside behind the sails. Vandiya Devan also needed a few
minutes; he wished to recuperate his strength and collect
his thoughts confused by the changes over the seascape.
He was ready to kill both those traitors with one swoop of
his sword, if the need arose. However, he was not sure if he
had the strength to do so. He needed the respite.
His eyes wandered back to the southwest horizon. The
black pillar had by now grown tremendously. Its flaming top
was less bright. It seemed to be growing even as he
watched. The breeze had picked up once again and was
now blowing steadily. The sea was beginning to stir; waves
began dancing again. The cloud group was growing and
approaching closer. The ship began to sway; wind whistled
in the sails and waves splashed against the sides ... Well!
What was that other sound? Something fell into the sea?
Vandiya Devan walked around the mast poles to the other
side. Ravidasa and Thevaralan were not there. Perhaps
they have gone to the other end ... But what is that noise?
Paddles splashing, someone rowing a boat!
He ran to the side and looked down. The sight that met
his eyes threw him into shock! He had not expected that!
He had thought that they had gone to confer on how to
pacify him. But they had gone aside to lower the rowboat
from the other side. They had already climbed down and
begun to row... Ravidasa laughed cunningly, "My Dear
Fellow we are not ready to be sacrificed."
Vandiya Devan realized his predicament. They were
abandoning him in that large wooden ship. He knew
nothing about sailing or ship navigation. They were truly

deserting him. "You traitors! Could you not take me with
you?"
"How can we disappoint the Ocean King? He needs at
least one sacrifice!" The rowboat was pulling away quickly.
Vandiya Devan wondered if he should jump into the sea and
swim to that boat. No, I cannot swim very well; even if I
manage to reach the boat, I am not sure about those
rogues. I know their secrets; they know that I would never
become one of them. They may beat me to death with the
paddle. I cannot battle with them while trying to float on
the water.
Good. Let them go; get lost. It is better to be
abandoned on a lost ship than be with them in a small boat.
God has helped me escape other tricky situations. God will
show a way... Perhaps, I should not have let them escape.
Where would they land? What other treachery have they
planned? What can I do. First, I must somehow get back to
the Prince. He should not have forsaken me like that. He
could have taken me along with Poonkuzlali on that
elephant. I must ask him about that when we meet again,
"Is this an example of that famous Chozla friendship?" I
wonder if I would ever have the opportunity to ask him that
question. I am sure to see him again. Azlvar-adiyan and the
Commander know that I am in this predicament. They will
surely do something about it. They will surely tell the
Prince about me....
By now the rowboat had gone quite far away. How did
it go so quickly? Ah this ship has been moving away too ....
in the opposite direction! These waves are growing bigger
and bigger; they sky seems to be becoming darker and
darker. The black cloud pillar had now grown to fill the
west. Soon, large patches of soot-black clouds were racing
across the sky. The sun quickly vanished over the west and
dusk covered everything in a blanket of darkness. It was
difficult to discern where the sea ended and sky began --

everything was one dark black patch. Clouds were filling
the eastern skies too. He could not see the rowboat any
more. It had vanished from his sight. The wind was
beginning to roar in competition with the cacophony of
swelling waves.
Unfurled sails on the ship’s masts began to flap noisily.
The logs and boards on the deck began to roll and crash,
starting their own symphony of noise. He looked at the
hoisted sails and guessed that the ship was not racing
towards any one direction. It was swirling round and round
aimlessly. Whirlwind! They talk about whirlwinds. This
must be it! He had heard somewhere that sails must be
rolled up and stowed away when the ship was caught in a
whirlwind. But how was that to be done? Could he do it
alone? Perhaps it is a job for ten men! I cannot do anything
about it now. God can take care. It is impossible to save this
large ship single handed. I know what will happen. This
ship is going to be battered this way and that; waves will
dash against it from all sides and soon break it into pieces
or sink it to the depths. There is no doubt about my fate
now! Death by drowning at mid-sea!
That astrologer at Kudanthai did not say a word about
this. Useless astrologer. If only I meet him again .... I shall
teach him some astrology....
Something cool fell on his shoulders; one, two, many
pebble sized hail-stones showered over him. Each stone
shone like crystal gems -- see how they are falling from the
sky; a pain when they hit me, then a coolness. Look on the
deck, the sea, they are everywhere and they melt so
quickly. He had never seen a hailstorm till then. He was
happy to have enjoyed that experience before his untimely
death. He began gathering those hailstones playing with
them. Their fiery cool touch amazed him. The hail storm
stopped as suddenly as it had started. It had not even
lasted half an hour! Soon a heavy downpour came crashing

down. He saw the rain cascade over the deck, run down the
ship’s sides and fall into the sea.
He was enthralled by the mastery of Chozla carpenters
and ship-builders: even if huge waves washed over the
deck, the water would flow over the sides and fall back into
the sea; as long as the door to the hold was bolted shut
tightly. Unless, the hull broke and water filled the hold, the
ship would not sink. He felt encouraged by this
observation. He ran to look at the hold-door; it was banging
noisily in the wind, letting rain get into the hold. Quickly he
pulled it shut and bolted the hold firmly.
If the wind and rain are unbearable, I could perhaps
hide in there! Those fools, leaving the safety of this wellbuilt ship, venturing into this unfriendly sea! However, that
boat was also well built. It was a catamaran. Even the most
turbulent sea would not make it capsize. If indeed its
boards broke, the survivors could bind themselves to the
out-rigger logs bound to its sides. They would probably go
ashore near Kodi Karai.
Vandiya Devan’s mind leaped across form Kodi Karai
to Pazlayarai. How would the Emperor’s beloved daughter
know about this fate that had overtaken him? Who will tell
her that he had drowned at sea while fulfilling her orders?
Will this sea tell her? This wind? Oh, Good God! Why did I
not die before I met that Jewel of Womankind? Why did I
not meet glorious death in battlefields? You have made me
glimpse at paradise and then thrown me into the depths of
hell.
Wind and rain grew louder and stronger. Sails and
masts howled like ghouls and danced with the ship.
Darkness grew even darker. A sudden shaft of lightning
flashed from one end of the sea to the other; rolling
thunder followed instantly; ship boards shook; sea water
boiled over; every direction shuddered. Another lightning

strike started low in the sky; it grew and grew branching in
every direction filling every nook and corner of the sky,
showering the world with an eerie light. Thunder broke in
world shattering splendor. Lightning and thunder danced
quicker and quicker -- which came first? light or sound?
"What an amazing sight? Why has the whole universe
not split yet?" Even before he could finish this thought, the
sky broke open shattering everything, drowning all in a
deluge. Waves danced in violent rage. Lightning flashed on
swaying mountains! Winds howled in glee and had their
way with the now tattered sails. How long could the ship
bear this attack from all the elements of the universe? It
would surely sink!
Vandiya Devan was not depressed by that thought
anymore. He felt that he was going to experience a glorious
death. His heart began a dance of wild abandon, keeping
step with the devil waves. All the deck was drenched by the
deluge of rain and battering waves. Vandiya Devan began
roaring with laughter keeping in tune with the thunder
reverberating all around him. Wanting to experience every
nuance of this cosmic phenomenon, he had already bound
himself tightly to the main mast of the ship. He did not wish
to be washed away by the deluge! The ship swirled faster
and faster; Vandiya Devan twirled quicker and quicker with
that swaying main mast.
How long did that incredible dance continue? Perhaps
a few eons? Or a few minutes? He had lost all sense of time
or direction. The wind was dying and rain had slowed to a
steady drizzle. Lightning had taken a break giving chance
to the sooty darkness.
He looked around in disbelief. Oh, wonder of wonders!
I have escaped the most terrible of whirlwinds. God must
have really saved my miserable life. I am sure to meet her
once again... speak with him again.... More patience is

essential. Even if this ship has survived the storm, where
am I now. How will I reach shore safely? The sky seemed to
give him a reply: A bright flash lit the whole sky; a hundred
suns came to stand before him. But he could see nothing in
that great light. He was even afraid if he had lost his sight.
He pinched his eyes shut, tightly. Now, his ears were in
danger. Lord Indra’s thunderbolt must have come
unsheathed. This cannot be a mere thunder of earthly
skies. He could not open his eyes and his ears were ringing
with a whirring noise. After some minutes, some new light
seemed to pry his eyes open. A new noise penetrated his
ears. It was similar to the sound made by trees in a forest
fire. "oiiiieee!" He opened his eyes to see that the main
mast of his ship was on fire. Now, he understood: that last
flash and thunder -- lightning must have struck somewhere
very close, his mast had caught fire.
Wind and water were not powerful enough forces to
destroy that Chozla ship. Agni, the God of fires was
succeeding where his friend Vayu of Wind and Varuna of
Water had failed.
***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 52 -- Smashed Boat
Upon seeing the main mast burning because of a
lightning strike, Vandiya Devan was sure that the ship
could not survive. Neither could he.
He was not worried; some sort of euphoria grew in
him. Laughing with joy, he unbound himself from the mast.
Why should he burn to death in the middle of an ocean? It
would be better to sink to the bottom and drown in the
water. He did not intend to waste the last few hours of his
mortal life. He wished to gaze upon the still turbulent sea
and enjoy its beauty in the light of the burning mast. It is
good to become completely familiar with the resting place
of his mortal remains. People say that persons who meet
such unnatural deaths would come back to haunt the place
of their death. Would my ghost wander over these parts?
Float on these winds? Dance over these waves? Will it swirl
with the whirlwinds that blow here?
Perhaps, one day, the Princess would come here on a
cruise.... The sailors would point out `That is the spot
where Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan the noble of Vallam
drowned.’ Tear pearls would bloom in her petal shaped
eyes and flow down her lotus face. If my ghost happens to
see that, would it be able to wipe away those tears?
The ship rose high upon the crest of a huge wave. The
light from the burning torch of the mast revealed
everything for some distance all around. The burning mast
poured colors of molten gold on the black crystal of the
stormy sea. Even as his eyes were drinking the beauty of
this spectacle, they spotted something else.
He saw another sailing ship in the distance. He saw
the Tiger-flag flying over its mast. Good Lord! There is no
limit to the marvels you have in store for us. His conscience
said: Arulmozli Varma is on that ship; he is looking for you.

Parthiban Pallava’s ship was also caught in the same
whirlwind that had tormented Vandiya Devan’s ship. But
experienced navigators and seamen who knew the nature
of such storms were on board that ship. They lowered the
many sails and rolled them up. They held the rudder and
turned the ship around so that it did not have to bear the
brunt of the worst waves. For one moment it would appear
as if the ship would completely overturn; the next minute it
would manage to straighten itself. Mountain-like waves
battered that ship from every side; but it held tight; not a
single board pried loose. The Ocean king played with that
ship, tossing it here and there like a ball. It twirled and
turned with every whim and fancy of the whirlwind. The
deluge from the skies tried to drown that fragile ship. That
ship -- built by master craftsmen of Chozla lands, handled
by master seamen of Chozla lands --it bore the brunt of this
assault very well.
The Sea-captain said, "I have seen whirlwinds and
monsoon storms worse than this. I have sailed my ship
through worse waters than this. There is no need to worry."
However, he shared his concerns about another matter with
Prince Arulmozli and Lord Parthiban Pallava.
Dark clouds had gathered all around and smothered
everything in darkness. Moreover, the rain was incessant.
Huge waves screened the ship on all sides. In this situation,
they would not be able to spot the ship they were looking
for, even if it passed by their side. That ship would also be
turning and tossing just like this one. If the two ships
accidentally collided in that darkness: it would be an end to
one and all!
The experienced Captain said that the surrounding
darkness which blinded them was more dangerous than the
raging storm. Prince Arulmozli was aware of this. He stood
on the deck with sharp eyes searching all around. With
every flash of lightning, his bright eyes would quickly swirl

in search. His heart was in a turmoil of distress. His
dearest sister’s messenger was a prisoner of Arab pirates
and despicable assassins. In addition, this whirlwind was
harassing them.
Perhaps I shall never see that brave young cavalier
again! Will I find that ship? Would he be alive? What if the
Captain’s fears come true and our ships dash against each
other? Then, who will give my father the news of the Mutequeen? I cannot share that family secret with Lord
Parthiban. He would be merely diverted by that information
and not realize its importance.
Prince Arulmozli had not faced a setback in any
venture till that day. Would he face failure now? Never, the
Ocean King will not keep quiet if danger or distress
threatens Ponni’s Beloved! He too saw that final, brilliant
flash of lightning and that last earth-shattering roll of
thunder. In fact, he had to close his eyes to avoid the
brilliance of that flash. When he opened his eyes again, he
discerned another light -- different from the flash of
lightning.
In the distance, a ship was dancing in a ghostly frenzy
with all its sails fully unfurled! A fire burned at the top of
its main mast. In the light of that fire, the Prince beheld a
man bound to that main mast! God! Can there be anything
more miraculous? He was that brave cavalier Vandiya
Devan of Vallam. Why was he alone? What happened to the
others? He had no time to worry about such details;
Arulmozli had made up his mind instantly.
Others on the ship had seen the same sight. They
raised a loud cry, "There!" The Prince ran up to the rescueboat bound to the side of the deck asking, "Who volunteers
to come with me?"
They sailors were stunned speechless when they
understood his intention. Nevertheless, several men

stepped forward. Parthiban and the Sea-captain tried to
stop him.
"Prince! What is this? How can you lower this rowboat
into this stormy sea? How can we save anyone from that
burning ship? Even then, I will send some men and try. You
need not go!" protested Parthiban.
"Be careful! Anyone who impedes me will never be
forgiven by me!" he ordered in a royal voice. He had
already begun to lower the boat, "Two men will suffice!"
The boat was lowered. Prince Arulmozli and the two
men he had selected jumped down into it. And the boat
moved away from the ship dancing madly over the waves.
All three began to pull at the oars with all their strength.
Slowly, slowly the boat neared the burning ship. By now the
fire had burned down the mast pole and was jumping to
adjacent poles. For some reason, Vandiya Devan continued
to stand at the same spot!
Vandiya Devan saw the other ship. He noticed the boat
being lowered and the men rowing towards him. He was
lost in astonishment; he was not even aware that he should
move.
"Jump! Jump into the sea!" shouted Prince Arulmozli.
He did not hear it and continued standing like a statue.
Soon the fire would jump to the deck and the lower hold.
The ship will sink. It would be impossible to save him after
that.
The Prince made a quick decision. He picked up the
rope from that rescue boat and tied one end firmly to his
waist, the other to a hook in the boat. He warned the two
seamen and jumped into the sea. The waves, which had
been playing ball with the boat, began to toss Prince
Arulmozli. They lifted him up to the sky for a minute and
tossed him down the next. Arulmozli did not lose his sense
of direction; he continued with strong strokes towards that

burning ship. A huge, swollen wave came rolling by. If it
had pushed him down, he would have drowned in the
depths; but it was a good wave! It carried him up its crest
and tossed him onto the deck of that burning ship.
Vandiya Devan had already freed himself from the
mast. He ran forward with a cry to help the man tossed on
the deck. Arulmozli immediately threw his arms around his
friend and held him tightly as he shouted, "Hold me tight!
Don’t let go."
Next minute, both were tossed into the sea again.
Arulmozli and Vandiya Devan who was holding tightly tried
to get near the rowboat. It was not easy to reach it or get
into it from that stormy sea. Arulmozli found it impossible
to carry the weight of Vandiya Devan who was clinging to
him and at the same time swim towards the tossing boat.
One moment it was within reach; next minute it moved
away. After a seemingly endless struggle, another wave
helped them. They rose with the wave and with the help of
the sailor tumbled into the catamaran.
"Pull the oars! Quick! Hurry!" roared Arulmozli. The
burning ship was about to collapse into the sea. The sinking
great-ship might topple the small boat. And if the ship sinks
and the fire goes out, they may not be able to find the other
ship in the darkness.
There! The burning ship was beginning to sink. What
an incredibly spectacular sight it was! They were in no
position to enjoy it. As expected, a huge splash as the ship
sank; a large heaving wave; the tiny boat somehow
managed to stay afloat. After the ship sank, darkness once
again enveloped them. They could neither discern the other
ship nor make out any directions.
Were the boat and ship nearing each other? Or moving
apart? Both options held danger. If the ship hit the boat in
that darkness, the tiny craft would be crushed. If it moved

away... What would they be able to do in the direction-less
sea, in that stormy darkness?
Ocean King you must save the darling Prince, Beloved
of your sweetheart Ponni River.
By nature, the Wind God is very very capricious. His
whirlwind went away with the same haste in which it had
come. It tormented the sea all along its path. The whirlwind
had died; however, the turbulence raised by it would not
die down soon; the stormy sea may last for a day and a
night. The storm was likely to travel long distances. The sea
would rise and invade the wide sandy beaches of Kodi
Karai. Huge tidal waves would try to destroy the harbor
ramparts of Nagaipattinam. The storm would cast its
influence on Gangesan Thurai and Tricone Hill. Even
Mattotam and Rameswaram would not be untouched.
That tiny boat carrying the Prince and his group tossed
and teetered. Soon the men stopped pulling at the oars. It
was useless now. They had no idea of direction or place.
The wind died; rain stopped; lightning and thunder had
ceased. But the rage of the waves had not calmed. An
unexpected danger was slowly, slowly nearing that
teetering boat.
When the burning ship sank, one of its huge masts
which had not burned completely, came loose from the
ship. It was slowly floating closer and closer to the
catamaran-boat. Because of the darkness none in the boat
saw it till it came very close. "Pull away! Pull the oars,"
shouted a man. Even before his shout died, the huge log
dashed against the bottom of the boat. That tiny craft split
open with a thundering sound. The planks split in smaller
and smaller smithereens.
"My Friend, Do not be afraid. That mast pole is safer
than this boat. Try and grab a hold of it," Arulmozli advised
his friend Vandiya Devan.

***
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 53 -- Song of Sustenance
Those who stood on the shores near River Thondai
watched till Prince Arulmozli reached Parthiban’s ship. As
soon as the Prince had gone aboard, the boat returned to
the shore. Commander Bhoothi Vikrama seemed happy; joy
reflected upon his face.
"God must be on our side without doubt. How can the
sign of the conch and discus on the Prince’s hands go
wrong? Parthiban will safely carry him to Kanchi. We and
our friends have to move towards Tanjavur." He seemed to
be speaking to himself. He realized that Azlvar-adiyan was
standing by his side.
"Oh! You are standing here! It does not matter, there is
nothing unknown to a confidential spy of the Prime
Minister. Well, What are your plans? Will you come to
Mattotam with me?" asked the Commander.
"No Sir. There is another order given me by the Prime
Minister. I have to finish that..."
"What is that?"
Azlvar-adiyan looked towards Poonkuzlali and the
Mute-queen who stood away from them.
"Is it something to do with those women?" asked the
Commander.
"Concerns one of them. The Prime Minister has
ordered that if I happen to seen a deaf-mute like her in
Lanka, I should somehow bring her to Tanjavur."
"Extraordinary order! He could have ordered you to
catch one of the storms blowing in these parts and bring it
instead! It would be easier than taking hold of that mutewoman. I wonder who she is? She seems to have a lot of
affection for our Prince. Do you know anything about her?"

"I know that she is mute; born deaf. I am aware that it
would be easier to capture a storm than lead her anywhere.
Still, since my master has ordered it, I shall make an
effort," said Azlvar-adiyan Nambi.
"This boat-girl seems to be friendly with her. Look at
them conversing in sign language. Ask that girl to come
here. I must warn her...."
Azlvar-adiyan walked up to them and told Poonkuzlali
that the Commander was asking for her. She walked
towards the Commander.
"Here Girl! You seem to be quite intelligent. You came
in time with an important news. You have been a great help
to the Chozlas. I shall not forget. I shall reward you
appropriately at the right time."
"Thank you, My Lord! I do not wish for any reward."
She spoke with courtesy.
"I won’t forget even if you do not wish it. Let all this
confusion die down. Afterwards I shall find you a suitable
husband from among the brave soldiers of the Chozla Army.
No ordinary man can be a husband for you. He must be an
exceptional fellow like Bhima of the Epic. Otherwise, you
would trample him underfoot!" the Commander laughed at
his own joke.
Poonkuzlali was looking at her feet. Rage filled her
body. She controlled herself. What could be the point in
quarreling with this foolish old man? She calmed herself.
"Remember this one thing. Don’t think you can take
liberties with the Prince because you have helped him. Stop
with throwing nets to catch ocean-fish. Don’t hope to net
royalty in your catch. Be warned Girl! It would be
dangerous to get too close to him." The Commander was
not wasting any subtlety. His voice was harsh. Each word
dropped like molten lead into Poonkuzlali’s ears.

Angry words of reply bubbled to her lips. But she was
not able to speak, her tongue stuck to her choking throat.
The molten lead in her ears must have tried to emerge from
her eyes: they burned with a fiery heat. She walked away
without raising her head, away from the beach. Her slow
steps began to quicken as she spared a glance towards her
mute-aunt. Azlvar-adiyan was trying to say something to
her. She felt like running away from every human being. I
do not want to hear any human voice. Men are cruel
beings. What harsh words they utter! How fortunate it
would have been if all of them had been born mute!
After some stretch through the forest, she reached the
banks of River Thondai. She began walking inland along
that bank aiming for her hidden boat. I must find my boat
quickly; get into it and escape out to sea. I must get away
far into the open ocean where no human voice can be
heard. I must drop my oars. The boat should dance on
tossing waves. I should go floating on endless water,
timelessly. Only then will my agony be soothed. My heart
wounded by the Commander’s poison words will be healed.
Anger will calm down. How could that old man say it? `Stop
with throwing nets to catch ocean-fish! Do not try to net the
Prince.’ Am I casting my net at him? Chee! Look at the turn
his old mind takes!
Sea fish are much better than humans living on the
land. They never speak such harsh words. They swim and
play in the deep ocean and enjoy happiness. They have
neither worry nor sorrow. Why was I not born a fish living
in the blue sea? Then I would not be caught in these
worldly emotions of anger, love, wants and desires. I could
go swimming endlessly. Then none would try to part me
from my Prince or tattle slander. Even that is no sure thing.
These horrid men would come to the depths with their nets.
What if they net only one of the pair of fish? Villains!

Her rage gave her legs a quickness. By mid-day, she
had found her boat. It was safe in the hiding place. That
boat was her dearest friend; her sanctuary. That small boat
was her only solace in the world full of distress and sorrow.
It is a surprise that it is not stolen! Let everyone be
damned. Let that horrid Commander guard his precious
Prince. Let him hang that Kodumbalur girl around his neck!
Why should I care? I have my boat and my oars. Strength in
my arms and the wide ocean before me. Ocean King ... You
will not betray your darling daughter even if all others
forsake her, would you?
Poonkuzlali got into her boat and began rowing
towards the sea. Since she went with the flow of the river,
she was at the mouth very soon. Within minutes she was at
sea. She realized that a whirlwind was imminent. She knew
the signs -- the grey ring around the moon last night; sultry
and muggy day today; not a leaf moved on the branches.
Yes, black clouds are already gathering in the southwest. A
storm is sure to break very soon. The stormy sea would be
a beautiful sight. But I should not get caught in the
whirlwind. Let me find shelter in Ghost Island. I can watch
the havoc of the storm from there. After the storm blows
over, and the sea begins to calm down, I can row my boat
towards Kodi Karai. Why hurry?
That ship might have reached Kodi Karai by now.
Luckily it will escape the whirlwind. The Prince would have
safely landed there. Perhaps he has gone on to Mamallai
Port? Why should I bother about that? All that matters is he
will escape the whirlwind. Poonkuzlali did not realize that
those sailing ships were immobilized in dead calm before
the whirlwind due to lack of any wind to push them. The
Commander’s words, `Do not try to throw your nets at the
Prince.’ were ringing in her ears again and again and
hurting her. Better that I do not land at Kodi Karai too
soon! She decided to row towards Ghost Island.

It was not too far away; within half an hour she was on
that desert island. The storm was already starting. She
dragged her boat high up the beach and secured it firmly.
Poonkuzlali walked towards a small Buddhist Shrine in that
island. Near that holy shrine, she found shelter from the
rain and wind inside a cave-room. But she was restless,
eager to see the tournament of the Gods of Wind and Water.
Emerging from the shelter, she walked up some steps and
climbed to the tower of that shrine.
Nature around her echoed the turbulence in her heart.
The hundreds of coconut palms on that island swayed and
danced like the demon followers of Shiva dancing at the
end of creation. Waves rose to cover the tops of those
palms sometimes. Poonkuzlali watched the ghoulish dance
accompanied by thunder and lightning. He body swayed to
that music; her long hair came unbound and flew around
her; rain drenched her and thunder deafened her ears. She
stood there for a long time enjoying that storm. She felt
that nature was putting on a show just for her.
He would have reached safe harbor at Kodi Karai by
now. Perhaps he is staying at my father’s house. Or gone to
the Royal Palace at Nagaipattinam. Could he be still at sea
on that ship? So what? The whirlwind cannot hurt that big
ship. He has many men to protect him. Will he think of me?
`Where is foolish Poonkuzlali?’ Will he think that? No. He
may think about that Vandiya Devan sent by his sister. He
may even think about that noblewoman of Kodumbalur.
Why should he remember this poor girl of the fisher-folk?
Late in the night, she went back to the cave shelter
and caught some sleep. There was no peace even in that
sleep. She was casting nets in the sea. The Prince was
caught in the net. Later, the Prince and she had turned into
fish-folk. After each dream she startled into wakefulness;
chiding herself for the foolishness.

By the time she woke, after sunrise, the storm had
died completely. The waves were not big anymore. The
storm had unleashed havoc on that island. Tall palms had
been uprooted and strewn here and there. As she was
examining the devastation, she saw a log floating on the
waves, coming shoreward. A man was bound to that log.
She ran out and helped him ashore, reviving him with some
fresh water. That man seemed half dead. He was a
fisherman from a coastal village of Lanka. He had gone
fishing and was caught in the whirlwind. He had lost his
boat mate to the sea and had more important news.
"Earlier in the night, the storm had passed and rain
lessened. Darkness surrounded us in the open seas.
Suddenly, there was a huge roll of thunder and lightning. In
that light I could see two great-ships. One ship caught fire
and began burning. I and my mate watched that for some
time. That ship seemed deserted; no one was on it. The
other ship seemed to have some men; they were moving
hurriedly. The burning ship soon began to sink. The other
vanished in the darkness." The fisherman spoke with
hesitant words.
Poonkuzlali worried if one of those ships was the
Prince’s ship. It need not be. There are many ships on these
seas. Perhaps some of the men from that burning ship are
still in the sea. They might be floating on some log or boat.
I should help them. My boat may be able to save some lives.
Otherwise, this birth is useless. Poonkuzlali pulled her boat
into the water and climbed into it. With all the strength of
her iron hands, she pulled at the oars. The boat flew over
the waves. It was difficult till she had crossed the wave
lines; after that her hand relaxed to their usual pace. A
sudden joy filled her soul. Her old song began to tremble on
her lips. It came alive with new words:
When wave filled oceans seethe
Why does the inner soul fill with joy?

When the earth-maid is in torment,
Why does the heart burst with bliss?
When thunder rumbles and directions tremble
What is that dexterous dance?

Vandiya Devan and Prince Arulmozli who had taken
hold of the drifting mast pole, floated on the water,
battered by the waves. It was just one night, but Vandiya
Devan felt as if it was one epoch. He lost hope very quickly.
There is no chance of reaching a shore. Each time they
were pulled down the valley of a trough, he felt it was the
end. He kept lamenting again and again, "My hasty nature
has dragged you into this awful predicament! What shall I
do?"
The Prince tried to soothe him and revive his hopes.
"Men have survived even four or five days of floating in
open water like this."
"How many days since we have been floating like
this?"
"Not even one night!" replied Prince Arulmozli.
"Lies! Lies! It must be many days!"
Very soon, he was troubled by another horror. His
throat felt parched with thirst. He was floating on limitless
water; but not a drop to quench his thirst. This was the
worst torture.
"Be patient," said the Prince, "day will break soon and
we will be washed ashore."
"Sir, I cannot tolerate this anymore. Unbind me. I will
drown in this water." Vandiya Devan had given up all
enthusiasm. Arulmozli tried to cheer him up. It seemed
impossible. Vandiya Devan seemed to be going crazy. He
tried to free his bindings. The Prince took note, and moved
closer. With one thump, Arulmozli rendered his friend
unconscious.

When Vandiya Devan revived, day had broken and it
was bright. Even the waves had grown quieter. Arulmozli
said, "Friend, we must be nearing some shore. I can see
palm trees. Patience for a little while."
"Sir, let go of me. Save yourself somehow."
"Do not lose hope. I will not abandon you like that!
What is that? Someone seems to be singing."
Yes, they could hear Poonkuzlali’s song as she floated
in her boat.
When wave filled oceans seethe
Why does the inner soul fill with joy?

It sounded like a song of sustenance to them. Even
Vandiya Devan who had lost more than half his life, who
was tired of body and mind, even he was revived by that
song. He came back to life. "Prince, it is Poonkuzlali’s
voice. She must be in her boat. We are saved!"
Soon the boat was visible to their eyes. It came closer
and closer. Poonkuzlali was motionless with surprise, "Can
this be real?" she wondered.
Arulmozli unbound the ropes around his friend and
then climbed into her boat. He then helped his friend get
in. Poonkuzlali stood motionless, holding her oars, like a
statue.
*** Whirlwind – Ponnis Beloved Part 2 is concluded ***

OceanofPDF.com

Main Characters
Aditya Karikala -- Crown Prince of the Chozla Empire, Sundara Chozla’s
eldest son.
Anirudda Brahma-raya -- The Prime Minister and confidant of Sundara
Chozla.
Arinjaya Chozla -- Sundara Chozla’s father, King Gandara Aditya’s younger
brother, died after ruling for merely one year
Arulmozli Varma -- Sundara Chozla’s younger son.
Astrologer of Kudanthai -- An astrologer patronized by Kundavai, a spy of
sorts.
Azlvar-adiyan Nambi, Thirumalai Appan -- A follower of the Vaishnava faith,
step brother of Esanya Bhattar, a spy. Claims Nandini is his adopted
sister.
Chandramati -- Manimekalai’s maid and confidant.
Esanya Bhattar -- A priest of Pazlayarai, elder brother of Azlvar-adiyan
Nambi. Had been tutor of Kundavai.
Gandara Aditya -- Sundara Chozla’s elder uncle, a devout follower of the
Saiva faith, ruled before Arinjaya Chozla.
Idumban Kari -- A footman from Kadamboor, a conspirator against Chozla
royalty, member of a gang sympathetic to Pandiyas.
Kalyani of Vaithumba -- Widow of King Arinjaya Chozla, a famous beauty,
Sundara Chozla’s mother.
Kandamaran -- A young nobleman, son of Sambuvaraya of Kadamboor.
Karuthiruman, the madman -- A prisoner with a past and a story.
Kirama Vithan Revadasan -- Pandiya Conspirator who knew Singhala
language; Raakammal’s father.
Kundavai, Younger Pirati -- Sundara Chozla’s daughter. Royal princess.
Lord Pazluvoor, the Elder, Ambalavan -- An important and powerful chieftain,
Officer of Taxation, Food Supply and Finance, brother of Kalanthaka,
Nandini’s husband.
Lord Pazluvoor, the Younger, Kalanthaka -- Commander of Tanjavur Fort,
Captain of the Guard Corps.
Lord Velir of Kodumbalur, the Elder, Bhoothi Vikrama Kesari -- An important
chieftain of the Chozla Empire, Commander of Chozla Armies in
Lanka. Elder-uncle to Vanathi.
Lord Velir of Kodumbalur, the Younger, Paranthaka -- Younger Lord of
Kodumbalur, Vanathi’s father who lost his life in a battle in Lanka.
Madurandaka Deva -- A Chozla Prince, son of Gandara Aditya and Sembiyan
Madevi, a few years older than Aditya Karikala.

Malayaman Milad-udayar of Thiru-Kovalur -- A nobleman, a Chieftain of the
Chozla Empire, Empress Vanamadevi’s father and grandfather to
Karikala, Arulmozli and Kundavai.
Mandakini -- Deaf-mute woman who wanders the seashores and forests of
Lanka. Vaani Ammai’s Sister.
Manimekalai -- Kandamaran’s younger sister and daughter of Kadamboor
Sambuvaraya.
Mazlava-raya -- A nobleman, Sembiyan Madevi’s brother.
Munai Raya -- A nobleman, not very confident in Lord Pazluvoor’s schemes.
Murugaiyyan -- Kodi Karai lighthouse keeper’s son, Poonkuzlali’s brother and
husband of Raakammal; a boatman.
Nallavan Sattanar -- Court poet at Tanjavur.
Nandini, Young-Queen of Pazluvoor -- An extraordinarily beautiful woman
with a mysterious past, Azlvar-adiyan’s adopted sister.
Parameswaran -- Pandiya Conspirator; Thevaralan dancer.
Parthiban Pallava -- A nobleman of the Pallava clan, Crown Prince Aditya
Karikala’s confidant.
Pinakapani -- Pazlayarai Doctors’ Son
Poonkuzlali -- Daughter of the Lighthouse Keeper of Kodi Karai, Sendan
Amudan’s cousin.
Raakammal -- Kodi Karai Boatman’s wife, sympathetic to Pandiya cause.
Ravidasa Brahmadirajan, the Sorcerer -- Leader of the Pandiya conspirators,
a former retainer of Veera-pandiya, Pandiya Aabathudavi body guard
who had a mysterious hold over Nandini
Sambuvaraya of Kadamboor, Sengannan -- A nobleman; Chozla feudatory;
crony of Lord Pazluvoor.
Sembiyan Madevi, Elder Pirati -- Widow of King Gandara Aditya,
Madurandaka Deva’s mother, fond of Sundara Chozla and his children,
devout.
Sendan Amudan -- A flower vendor of Tanjore, lived with his deaf-mute
mother in the outskirts of the city.
Soman Samban -- A conspirator against Chozla royalty, member of Ravidasa’s
gang, sympathetic to Pandiyas.
Sundara Chozla Paranthaka -- Emperor of the Chozla Kingdom.
Tyaga-Vidangar -- Lighthouse keeper at Kodi Karai. Poonkuzlali’s father.
Vanamadevi of Thiru-Kovalur -- The Queen Consort, wife of Sundara Chozla,
mother to Karikala, Kundavai & Arulmozli.
Vanathi Devi -- A young noblewoman of the Kodumbalur clan, Kundavai’s
friend, in love with Prince Arulmozli.
Vandiya Devan Vallavarayan -- A scion of the Vaanar clan of Vallam, Aditya
Karikala’s friend and messenger.

Vaani Ammai -- A deaf-mute woman, garden keeper living on the outskirts of
Tanjore. Amudan’s Mother. Mandakini’s sister.
Vasuki -- Nandini’s maid.
Veera-pandiya -- Pandiya King vanquished and killed by Prince Aditya
Karikala.

--------OceanofPDF.com

Glossary
Aadi -- A month of the Tamil calendar, about July-Aug
Aanai -- Elephant
Aavani -- A month of the Tamil calendar, about Aug-Sept
Aiyyo, acchachcho -- Exclamatory expressions denoting, fear, despair, grief,
amazement, regret, etc. similar to, “oh dear.”
Advaita -- A philosophy, belief in the non-dual nature of God
Agil -- Agar wood; fragrant wood
Akka -- Elder sister, a respectful greeting for an older girl
Amma -- Mother, a respectful greeting for women, both old and young
Ankush -- A goad used by elephant drivers
Anna -- Elder brother, respectful address for older men
Araya, raya, arasa -- King, chieftain, Raja
Ayya -- Father, respectful mode of address for men particularly a revered or
elderly person
Ayyanaar -- Village guardian deities made of gigantic terracotta painted
figures; shown riding horses, elephants
Bharata Natyam -- Classical dance style
Chakra -- Discus
Champaka – Fragrant Magnolia
Chanakya -- A medieval personality of political cunning
Devi, Deva -- Lady, Lord
Eezlam -- Tamil name for Lanka or present-day Sri Lanka
Iruvatchi -- A fragrant flower
Jaamam -- A period of time 3 hours long; 1 Jaamam = 7½ Nazli; 1 Nazli = 24
minutes.
Jaggery -- Unrefined or brown sugar
Kaadal -- Love
Kaadam -- A league or about 10 miles
Kaalaa-mukhas -- Ascetic followers of Shiva, a fanatic sect
Kaavi -- Reddish, ocher dye
Kadal -- Sea
Kadamba -- A flower
Kama -- Love, Passion
Kapaalika -- An ascetic sect of Saiva Faith
Karadi -- 1. A musical instrument 2. Bear

Karagam -- Folk dance with balancing decorated pots
Karaiyar -- Coastal, fisherfolk
Karpaga -- A cornucopia, tree of plenty from the heavens
Karppu -- Sanctity of a married woman. Chastity
Kavi -- 1. Poet 2. Monkey
Kinnara -- Demi-divinities; heavenly musicians
Kolam -- Decorative drawings of rice flour
Konnai, Konrai -- A flowering tree; yellow laburnum flowers
Koothu -- Dance
Kovai fruit -- Ripe fruit of the scarlet gourd or ivy gourd
Kulam -- Clan, family group
Kumkum -- Red powder, used to decorate the forehead
Kummi -- A folk dance of women circling while clapping hands
Kunrimani -- A tiny red-black berry or bead
Kural -- Ancient Tamil couplets
Kuravai Koothu -- Dance of the Forest folk, often vigorous, dance by maidens
weaving flower garlands
Maalai -- Garland
Malai -- Mountain
Maari Amman -- A village deity, a rural Goddess
Marudai -- A shade giving tree, a colloquial name for Madurai City
Mattalam -- Drum
Maya, Maaya -- Deception, unreal
Moringa -- A leafy tree, bears drumstick like long fruit
Musth -- A natural periodic condition even in trained male elephants that
make them go aggressive and unpredictable
Mu-ttholl-ayiram -- A collection of romantic verse in Tamil
Muzlai -- Cave
Naadaswaram -- Elongated windpipe like musical instrument that produces a
loud melody; a wind-horn
Naadu -- Country
Naamam -- A vertical, religious mark worn by followers of Vishnu
Naanal -- A sedge like grass
Naavalo, naaval -- taunts proclaiming victory or battle-cries
Nandavana -- Garden
Nappinnai -- Tamil name for Radha of Northern India
Netri-chutti -- Forehead ornament

Nilaa-muttram -- A courtyard, plaza or gathering place
Paadal Petra Sthalam -- A place recognized in songs composed by saints
Padai Veedu -- Army housing
Padinettam Perukku -- Eighteenth day flood festival
Palli Padai -- Memorial temple
Panchayat -- Council of Village Elders, often five persons
Parai -- A kind of country drum, an announcement
Pattinam -- City or Town, often a suffix for a Port Town. Ur is inland town.
Perumal -- Lord, God
Pirati -- Lady, Royal Princess
Pitam, Peetam, matam -- Monastic seat
Punnai -- A tree with yellow flowers
Rudraksha -- A multifaceted bead, a sacred berry
Saelai -- Loose pleated garment of women worn with one loose end thrown
over a shoulder
Saiva -- A denomination of Hinduism, follower of Shiva
Salli -- A musical instrument
Selvan -- Beloved, Darling (masculine), Son
Selvi -- Beloved, Darling (feminine), Daughter
Semakalam -- Cymbal like metal drum played in temples to announce the
hour of time
Silappadikaram -- A Tamil Epic
Sindhu -- Folk song
Tamarind -- A shade giving tree bearing a sour fruit
Thambi -- Younger brother, mode of address for young men
Thaye -- Mother, mode of respectful address for women
Thaazlai -- A fragrant cactus; screw-pine
Themmangu -- Folk Song
Thevar-aalan, -- Male Divine dancer, spoke oracles if possessed
Thevar-aatti -- Female Divine dancer, spoke oracles if possessed
Thevaram -- Devotional Poems
Thiru -- An honorific prefix; if it is attached to the name of a town, it usually
indicated that the town was blessed in songs composed by saints of the
faith tradition. Used as an addressing-prefix ex., Mr., Senor, Revered
Thiru-vai-mozli -- Devotional Poems
Thinnai -- A raised platform or dais on the front porch of houses in South
India. Often used like a living room; for family gatherings, seating
visitors, and sleeping in the night.

Udukku -- Small palm held drum
Ur, Oor -- Town or civilized place as opposed to untamed forest or Kaadu;
pattinam is port town
Uriyadi -- A game to get the prize-pot tied to a tall pole.
Vaetti -- Loose lower garment of men
Vaishnava -- A denomination of Hinduism, follower of Vishnu
Vamsa -- Dynasty
Veenai -- A musical stringed instrument
Velan Attam -- A semi-religious dance, usually by a man
Villu-pattu -- Folk songs accompanying a string instrument, story telling
Vinnagara -- Vishnu temple
Yaazl -- A stringed musical instrument
****

OceanofPDF.com

About the Author
Indra Neelameggham loves literature. She lives in the
United States
This translation is an attempt to capture the beauty of
Tamil in English.
This novel by Kalki captured her teen imagination and
wanted to share the incredible experience with the whole
wide world.
Indra suggests:
Enjoy the first reading to get the story
The second reading to enjoy the language of Kalki
The third reading to explore the incredible history and
culture of the Tamils.
And then, if possible, read the original in Tamil.
Indra writes, reads, gives talks and just enjoys life.
She is glad to have had the opportunity to be the first
person to translate Ponniyin Selvan in to English [1990s.]

Connect With Author
Contact Email: nealer0@yahoo.com
Website: https://indllc.wixsite.com/indrasponniyinselvan
***

OceanofPDF.com

